Are You Excited About Tomorrow?
 
4 min read
When you go to bed at night, are you excited to wake up the next morning? Is there something you can’t wait for?

For the past three years or so, I’ve asked myself that question many nights. And often, I had nothing to be excited about. Those days were not special. They were like the day before.

It’s the opposite of big days like your first day at a new job, the first time you go on a holiday with your girlfriend/boyfriend, getting your diploma, signing a big deal; you name it.

Those things are nice and all. But most days of your life are the same. Do you know that feeling? You look back, and time seems to blend. You can’t separate days from each other. There’s a real danger in that feeling.

Because the next step is that you can’t separate the weeks from each other. That is what happens when every day is the same. And after a while, you stop noticing many things. You just go with it.

And finally, the years start to blend. And all of a sudden, you’re 80 years old, and you’re sitting in a chair, and you say:

“What happened to my life? Where did all my time go?”

I think many people underestimate the value of life. I’ve done that for many years as well. When I look back at my time in college, I think that I had a great time. But I can’t recall much from those years. It’s just like this one big event.

It’s like: “College was awesome.” I say it as I went for a week. But the truth is that I completed two degrees in six years. SIX years! That’s a long time.

But I just remember that I went out a lot, drank beer, had fun, and did A LOT of chilling with my friends. It was always the same.

And after I got out of college, I worked a lot and traveled a lot. Again, when I look back, it seems like time moved fast.

I’ve thought a lot about why that is. And I think that the Stoic philosopher, Seneca, who lived about 2000 years ago, had a good answer:

“Begin at once to live, and count each separate day as a separate life.”

The problem is that we don’t treat every single day as a separate life at all. We wake up, drink coffee/tea, take care of our family, go to work, make money, do groceries, have drinks, watch Netflix, and go to bed. Or whatever your routine is.

The next day you wake up, and you repeat the EXACT same thing.

Do you know that proverb; variety is the spice of life? I’m sure you do. But why don’t you spice up your life?

Would you eat the same food every single day of your life? No one does that. You switch it up. One day you have some Italian, then some Chinese, maybe some Indian. Whatever. Or if you eat one cuisine, you switch up the herbs or spices.

So why on earth don’t you do that with your life?

If you’re not excited. Get excited. 
The funny thing is that variety is simple. Here’s another cliché for you — the best things in life are free.

Every day, pick something you want to enjoy. One day you can enjoy the rain, the other day you can enjoy the sunset.

Or how about having your favorite breakfast tomorrow? Or how about trying a whole new breakfast from another cuisine? I’m just throwing some tiny ideas at you. Variety doesn’t have to be big.

Get excited about life. Learn new skills. Languages. Cultures. Build a strong body. Switch up the little things. All those little things make life long and interesting.

These days, I’m glad that time doesn’t blend anymore. I treat every day as a separate life. And every day I’m a different person. A little bit stronger, educated, and different than the day before.

If you want to enjoy life, you have to make it happen. A good life doesn’t happen to you. Most people think that’s the case. They ask: “Why does my life suck?” Well, if you want a good life, YOU have to turn that into a reality. No one’s going to do it for you.

When you’re in bed, ask yourself: Am I excited about tomorrow?

If the answer is no many days in a row, it’s time to do something about it.
If the answer is maybe, ask again tomorrow, maybe you had a shitty day.
If the answer is yes, go to bed with a smile on your face, and jump out of your bed in the morning.
Change is good, but you also have to be practical. You have responsibilities, issues, people to take care of, bills to pay, etc. So you can’t just hop on a plane and go to the Maldives if your life sucks right now.

But you CAN do many other small things that turn every day into a separate life. So do it.