
What I’m Reading During Christmas And New Year
 reading christmas
3 min read
If you’re looking for good books during the holidays, you might find something interesting in this reading list for Christmas and New Year.

In 2015, I’ve read exactly 109 books (I use Goodreads to keep count). This is 104 books more than in 2014. Why the dramatic increase?

1) Life is short
2) Knowledge improves your life

“Not all readers are leaders, but all leaders are readers.”
? Harry S. Truman

It’s not a coincidence that I was more productive than ever this year. I believe there is a relationship between happiness, wealth, health, and reading. All leaders are readers.

If you’re looking for books to read during the Holiday, you might find something interesting below. These are the books that I’m currently (re)reading or just finished. If you’re looking for more recommendations, check out the books I recommend everyone should read.

Richard Branson – Screw It, Let’s Do It
This is one of the books that I enjoyed the most this year. It’s short, witty, and is full of life lessons from one of the coolest people in the world. Branson is not only wealthy, but he is also a happy person. But he also writes about periods he was scared for his life, or when he was depressed. It’s a short read—highly recommended if you’re looking for a quick dose of inspiration.

Helen Keller – The Story Of My Life
I’ve read a lot about Helen Keller in self-help books. She’s an inspiration for many different reasons. She was the first deafblind person to earn a bachelor of arts degree—she did this in 1904 at the age of 24. And she published 12 books. I’m currently in the middle of her autobiography, and I’m awed by her confidence and persistence. She is one of the most inspirational historical figures, and her autobiography will show you why.

Seth Godin – Tribes
I’m a big fan of Seth Godin. He influences most entrepreneurs and marketers with his books and daily blog. Next to marketing, Godin is also known for his excellent leadership advice. Tribes give great insight into why the current world needs more leaders like you.

Marcus Aurelius – Meditations
This book means a lot to me. This book, and On The Shortness Of Life by Seneca changed my outlook on life this year. I read both those books in January, and it’s interesting to reread them now. I can see that my views and stoic beliefs have only strengthened in those 12 months. Meditations is an excellent read if you are looking for practical life advice. I can’t think of any other book that does this better than Marcus Aurelius’s Meditations.

Haruki Murakami – What I Talk About When I Talk About Running
Recently I wrote about how running impacted my life. One of my friends who read my article recommended Murakami’s book. Even though he has published several novels, I’ve never read one of his books—I had no idea what to expect. But when I picked this book up, I was hooked immediately. I finished it in 1 day—it’s that good, and that fun to read. It’s not only a story about running—it’s about life and how it changes. Also recommended for non-runners.

Ernest Hemingway – The Old Man And The Sea
I read this book many years ago and did not like it all. I think I didn’t appreciate writing enough at that time. I was mostly reading authors like Easton Ellis, Palahniuk, and Mcinerney. It was such a stark contrast that I thought The Old Man And The Sea was boring. I’m glad I reread it—I can see why this book received a Pulitzer Prize.

Whether you pick one of the above books or something else, I don’t care (I didn’t use affiliate links). However, I do hope you pick up 1 or 2 books and close out the year reading something good. The last thing you want is to start 2016 without inspiration.

So, what are you reading?

