HOW TO MANAGE YOUR TIME EFFECTIVELY?

Facebook Twitter  Share
Days like money: if they are not planned, they have the ability to disappear. In order to take control of your time and learn how to manage it, you need to prioritize your duties, and to eliminate the habit of spending time in vain. 

Have you desired to prepare for an important meeting in the morning? But opened the email and realized that it was already noon? Have you found yourself in such a situation? If yes, then this article is just for you. 

Critically evaluate your day

Spend a week, tracking your duties and the time that was spent on them. You will probably be shocked at how much time you spend on a worthless actions. 

Calculate the time

Divide your responsibilities into several broad categories: family, work, hobbies, home, fitness, relationships, and others. And also highlight the three main goals you want to achieve in each category. 

Be selective 

Mercilessly kiss goodbye to those tasks that do not help you to move towards your goal. You should not finish a book that you are absolutely not interested in just because you want to finish the reading of it. After all, you spend more time and nerves on the things that you do not like. 

Make up a plan 

On a blank daily calendar register the time for your sleep, and then all the everyday actions that you perform. Also register the time of the work and the meetings, the time that you plan to spend with family, sports. Set your time according to your priorities and goals. Also register the time on the calendar when you will schedule timetable for the next week. 

Your day might look like this ... 

8 a.m. – Your way to work. Are you in a hurry every day? Find more time if needed. 

9 a.m. – Settle at work. Respond to urgent messages, but at a certain time continue to move on in your working day. 

10 a.m. – Write down the report. No breaks! Do not get distracted, let your thoughts be focused. 

12 p.m. – Lunch with friends. Your reward for being focused for the first half of the day. Rejoice in these moments with your friends. 

3 p.m. – Time to relax. Schedule daily or several times a week's time for spontaneous relaxation. 

5 p.m. – Hobby. If you do not find time for your personal projects and cherished desires, you will never achieve them. 

8 p.m. – Family time! The ultimate goal: to be sure to find time for your family and children. 

