HOW TO DEAL WITH DIFFICULT COWORKERS?
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: CAREER
Difficult Coworkers
Facebook Twitter  Share
No matter how great your team is, there are always people who want to break the rules. Below you will see the tips that help to deal with difficult and annoying coworkers and how to make your day less stressful. 

Coworkers who always interrupt
You are getting ready to announce your team about a new client, but at this point somebody interrupts you and now the attention is on that person. When this happens, try to stay calm and continue your thought when the other person stops. 

Office whisperer
No matter how great in the open policy of your company is, if you meet a whisperer at the corridor, you’ll lose lots of time listening to the gossips about everything and everybody. Make it clear to the person that you value your working time. 

Coworker who is afraid of every task
For such a person every task is a test on his nerves, starting from the schedule and finishing with meetings preparations. You cannot control his actions but you can control your reactions. Ask this person whether he needs help and assistance. If he is too nervous to accept your help, try to explain that the situation is not as stressful as this person thinks. 

Coworker Mr. “No!” 
Forget about your point of view, because this employee doesn’t want and won’t listen to them. New strategies that go beyond his understanding will be immediately refused. Let him speak first and then ask questions that need concrete and open answers. 

Coworker with no manners
You hear him chewing, or smell the products he brings to the office, or you might be annoyed by his booish conversations. If you don’t like this, try to talk to this person. And if it doesn’t work, contact the manager with the request to solve this problem. 

Smart Alec 
Whether it's a failed business, lost client or another failure at the workplace, Mr. know-it-all knows and can always tell whom to blame. First of all, try before every deal to write down a list of duties and write down what employee is responsible for what. This will help to put everything in place. 
