7 RULES OF LIFE FROM LIZ BURBO
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
Liz Burbo
Facebook Twitter  Share
Each of us wants to be healthy, happy, loved, and rich. Today I want to tell you about one simple method of Canadian woman, which is used by millions of people and who are satisfied with the results. Her idea is that each of us can change your life for the better, and may do it immediately. 

But first, I'd like to talk a little bit about this Canadian woman, a psychologist, philosopher and enlightener. Back in 1984 she created in Quebec, Canada, a major research center for the study of personality development and the problems that are associated with emotional experiences, diseases and various ailments. Nowadays, the center offers a special wellness courses developed on her methodology. Also it is worth noting is that these techniques are approved by the Government of Canada. 

In 1987 Burbo released her first book "Listen to your body: it's your best friend," and at the same time created the publishing house "Listen to your body”. Very soon she became very popular, conducted lectures at various universities and subsequently released another 12 books. 

Nowadays the philosophy of Liz Burbo "Listen to your body" is popular in 11 countries and is taught in the 9 languages. 

1. We take one hundred percent responsibility for your life. And not for the life of others. 

2. At any time you can change your life - just start thinking positively. 

3. The subconscious mind does not understand the positive or negative sense, which the words bear, it understands only the images. So when you imagine what you don’t want, this image appears in your mind, but without the "no." Therefore be careful, do not materialize your fears! 

4. Your subconscious or intuition is your best friend. Having established contact with it you'll never be alone. 

5. You can not love others until you learn to love yourself. 

6. There are no bad people; there are only those who suffer. 

7. Any illness is a signal given to you by the subconscious that contrasts in your way of thinking or behavior with the Great Universal Law of Love. 
