INNOVATIONS ON THE SUNSCREEN’S LABELS
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
Sunscreens
Facebook Twitter  Share
What you need to know? 

Summer is in full swing and many people buy sunscreen to protect themselves and their families. But it should be noted that new rules on labeling of sunscreens have come in force, which are really positive for consumers. 

The new rules make the label to be more informative with less confusing and unnecessary information on it. The word "waterproof" is replaced by "water-resistant", and also the time during which should be repeated the use of the lotion should be specified. 

When sunlight hits your skin, it is exposed to ultraviolet A and B spectrum. Ultraviolet B radiation (UVB) can cause the sunburn, and ultraviolet A (UVA) can cause premature skin aging and wrinkling. Both can cause the development of cancer. Sunscreens are able to protect and from UVA, UVB rays. 

The best sunscreen is the one that protects against both types of radiation, from both UVA and UVB. Under the new rules it should be written "broad-spectrum".

SPF is a measure of how much longer this cream protects your skin. Assuming that your skin turns red after 10 minutes of exposure to the sun, sunscreen with SPF 15 prevents redness of the skin for 150 minutes under the same conditions. You would think that the SPF 30 will work twice as better than SPF 15, but it is not necessarily so. While SPF 15 filters about 93% of the incoming rays UVB, SPF 30 filters out 97% and the SPF 50, increases this level to 98%.

The new rules also require an additional line on the label that warns: Skin cancer / premature aging alert: Time spent in the sun increases the risk of skin cancer. This product is intended to prevent sunburn, not skin cancer and premature aging. 

In order to reduce the risk of skin cancer and premature aging, the American Academy of Dermatology recommends using a sunscreen with the following features, which are indicated on the label: 

• Cream of "broad spectrum", which protects against UVA and UVB. 

• SPF 30 or higher

• Water-resistance 40 or 80 minutes

