Terrorism

 

 

Recent serial bomb blasts in Mumbai brought the issue of terrorism on center stage again. Terrorism has not become a worldwide phenomenon. Terrorism means an armed violent movement directed against government as well as non government targets, involving pre-meditated attacks with arms, ammunition and explosives against civilians, and resorting to intimidation tactics such as hostage taking and hijacking.

Terrorism can also be defined as an organized way of intimidation and violence especially for political purpose. Political frustration, political necessities, religious and racial fanaticism and personal political interests are some of the main causes of terrorism.

Since independence. India has been facing the problem of terrorism in different parts of the country. India has faced exclusively terrorist movements in Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir, bordering Pakistan, terrorist movements in the northeast, bordering Myanmar and Bangladesh; in Bihar, bordering Nepal; and in certain interior states like Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh ad Orissa that do not have international borders.

Indian terrorist groups have external links with like-minded terrorist groups in other countries. The link between the Marxist groups of Indian with Maoist groups of Nepal, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh; the link between the indigenous Kashmir organizations with the religious, fundamentalist and jihadi organizations of Pakistan; the link between organizations such as the Students Islamic Movement of India with jihadi elements in Pakistan and Saudi Arabia; and the link between the Pakistani pen Islamic jihadi organizations operating in India with AI-Qaeda and the Taliban are well known.

India has to fight its own with the terrorism being funded and encouraged by the neighboring countries. How can we expect that USA or Britain will feel the pinch of Terrorists attack in India? To look for support from either of them would be a folly. Just like any other country, we have to empower ourselves, we have to tackle our problems in our own always. Terrorism has to be dealt firmly with determined efforts and indomitable political will with the full and all out support of all political parties and every citizen.

Essay No. 2

Terrorism

Terrorism is a system of frightening people, to make them do what the terrorists want. Senator Denton has called it ‘’the most widely practiced form of modern warfare”. These activities of terrorism are both fashionable and criminal actions. The motives behind terrorism may be personal or political. Whatever the motives of the terrorists may be, they affect National Integration.

Terrorism is derived from the word “Terror” which means “extreme fear”. The persons who make atmosphere of extreme fear among masses are called terrorists. Such type of activities is called terrorism. The aim of a terrorist is to spread terror among people. They kill those persons or officials who oppose their evil deeds. Thus they create an atmosphere of terror to suit their designs.

Today, terrorism is a world-wide problem ranging from aircraft hijacking, planting of bombs in air craft’s, brutal killing of opponents and innocent people by the terrorists are heard every day from far and near. It is often seen that terrorist groups whether in India or Sri Lanka or elsewhere in the world, receive money, weapons and training from other foreign countries. These terrorists have unlimited access to sophisticated weapons. They believe that the highest form of revolutionary terrorism should utilize the most advanced science and technology.

In India, terrorism struck in the recent past in one form or another, especially in Punjab, Assam, Darjeeling and other States. Now recently it began showing teeth in Kashmir also. These people are directly being sponsored by a neighbouring country. It has put the people in extreme difficulties wherever the menace has erupted. The newspapers are filled with reports of violence, murder, explosion, shooting. In these terrorist activities hundreds of innocent men and women are killed. Many official building are either destroyed or burn to ashes, for no reason. Today it looks uncertain how long this lust for blood will continue. But it is rather obvious that these people have no other reason for the terrorist activities than creating menace among the people.

Terrorism is the main problem of our country this time. Steps should be taken to tackle the situation peacefully. The people involved in it are mostly our own people, our own blood. They have some misconceptions and misunderstandings. These can be solved by getting them on the negotiation table.

Several steps are now taken all over the world to control these activities like establishment of anti-terrorist forces to battle terrorism. The countries like Britain, Russia, and Germany have their own anti-terrorist forces. India has also established such forces to fight to terrorism. The police and sundry Para military forces have been present in certain areas of the country where violence is at worst. India has not taken steps to check the terrorism in her own country but also helped her neighbouring countries like Sri Lanka to fight them.

 

Essay No. 03

 

Terrorism

Terrorism is perhaps the most hated word in the modern age. It is particularly an anathema to those who have had personal experience of its diabolical dimensions.

Of late, terrorism has become a world-wide phenomenon. India had been telling the world of the large-scale destruction being caused to life and property in Kashmir by the Pakistan sponsored terrorists. 011 But most of the western world had turned a blind eye to India’s pleadings. The west, particularly the USA, realized its taste when the (WTC) towers 0 in America were leveled down through explosions caused by the sudden attacks by striking aeroplanes on them on 9th September, 2001 (9/11). Thus, the 9/11 event opened the eyes of the world.

As a result of this 9/11 incident, America took up the task of defending the world and getting it rid of the scourge of terrorism. Accordingly the American President in collaboration with the U.K Prime Minister Tony Blair drew up a road map of controlling and eliminating terrorism. A number of terrorist organisations, Al Qaeda ill-being the most conspicuous among them, were banned. A number of countries were declared as the Axis of Evil. Afghanistan was attacked and the regime of the Taliban was brought to an end. But the most wanted terrorist, Osama Bin Laden could not be killed or captured.

Later, America attacked Iraq declaring that the country possessed Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), although it’s dictatorial President Saddam Hussein denied it all along. The war was won. Later, two sons of Saddam Hussein were killed, though the President himself went underground. But, later in a December 2003, he was captured i dramatic manner in a hole under the earth.

In Kashmir, the terrorists have been playing have for about two decades. Thousands of terrorists themselves, members of security forces and innocent citizens, including men and women have been killed Indian Parliament had to face a terrorist attack on 13th December 2001. Fortunately, the Parliament which was in session was saved but a number of security guards lost their lives.

Terrorism had its heyday in Punjab in the 1980s and in early 1990s. In Andhra Pradesh we have Marxist terrorists (People’s War Group PWG). In Assam and some other eastern State we have ULFA, Bodo and other terrorists. In December 2003 there was a crack-down on ULFA terrorists in Bhutan who operated against India from that land In order to overcome the menace of terrorism, all the States in India and all the countries in the world should join hands to form a concerted coordinated policy.  

 

Essay No. 04

 

 

Terrorism 

The relationship of India and Pakistan can be very  vividly understood when we see and read about this long drawn out protracted programme of spread of terrorism in India. Terrorism in India has in the last ten years taken its toll in India and with so many years at it, it clearly shows that, Pakistan is in no mood to be friendly. Instead, it appears that, Pakistan is hell bent upon annihilating its parent neighbour. 

What actually is terrorism it is the spread of terror, as the name indicates. This terror can be spread by just frightening the other, by looting the other or by killing the other. As regards the terrorism in India it has reached the last type, one of killing indiscriminately. Since a war against India may prove to be disastrous, for Pakistan, it has taken recourse to this slow but sure poisoning of India, by a continuous war of nerves also including deaths of Indians.

All this is being done very methodically with a sure purpose in mind. Terrorists are given full fledged training in army discipline, provided with the most sophisticated weapons after teaching them the use, and given a lot of money for the task. Then they are helped to sneak into the Indian Territory across the border, with specific instructions to do as much damage as possible. Once on the Indian side the terrorists are engaged in arson, loot, killings, and terror. The purpose of all this is bold and clear to spread terror and make people run out of the territory. Once terror is spread, people run for safer places and the target is thus achieved. This holocaust is being tried out in Kashmir with an obvious attempt at annexing Kashmir for, if all the already minority of the Hindus flee from Kashmir, if ballot is then tested, there is no chance of a vote for India. With the purpose of annexing Kashmir to Pakistan this long drawn out programme of killing and terrorizing has been  successfully launched and vigorously followed through the last decade and more. 

For the last decade and more, the terrorists have crossed the Jammu and Kashmir border and struck terror in the State, so much so that, 80% of the Hindu community has tied the area and settled in other parts of India. Such a tragic situation has been created that, these people are rendered homeless in their own country and outsiders doing it all with such impunity. The situation has lasted for ever so long and defies any solution up to date. The extending of a friendly hand, the coming on to a battlefield, the offer of talks all this has been tried and proved to be fruitless. The process seems to be unending in Kashmir, and threatens to spread to other parts of the country. Even after an offer of a unilateral ceasefire, conditions have not improved at all. The position as it stands to-day is that, India continues even to extend its ceasefire, while on the other hand Pakistan continues to hit hard at India all the time. This is a mind boggling situation and it is a wonder how a solution can be reached with these opposing attitudes at work, one side offering peace and the other a battering at all costs. How can the two ways of thinking chalk out a feasible solution, is to my mind a very distant future if at all.

It appears that, all people who matter on both sides are finding themselves at a loss to find an amicable solution Terrorists continue to be trained and bred by Pakistan and sent across the border to spread terror, and India continues to suggest peace. It seems that, only God can solve this, tricky problem man is failing to entirely. God alone knows how many lives of Indians will have to be sacrificed before we reach an understanding. It is however very clear that Pakistan means business and the end of the road is not yet anywhere in sight

This is the situation in India but now terrorists have started spreading their ominous wings in other parts of the world also. It appears that, the entire world will have to work together against this menace of terrorism, before the ogre gets to a destruction spree through the length and breadth of the world. Only if the brains of the world get together it seems that terrorism may be washed out of the scene no one country can face and end this plan of destruction.

Essay No. 05

Terrorism

“The Terrorists are like an unwanted growth in a beautiful garden. If it were cut, it would come up again. Hence it should be completely uprooted.” Terrorism refers to kidnapping and killing to attract wider attention to a particular cause and thus to force a targeted authority to accept demands.

Terror tactics are generally adopted by isolated groups who are bent upon getting a sympathetic audience for their grievances. They generally get normal or financial support from the groups of community on whose behalf they lift arms to challenge the authorities.     

The conditions for rise of terrorism exist in many parts of the country. Terrorist find favourable environment to grow in states located near the international border. For one thing, terrorists can hit the targets and then escape into a foreign country.  Secondly they get arms, training, and financial support from the borders of enemy country. Thus, most terrorist groups in Punjab and Jammu and. Kashmir receive support from the bordering Pakistan while the insurgents of North-east have their training-camps in Bangladesh and Myanmar.

The terrorist attack by air in New York and Washington have brought a new phase in the history of mankind. American President Bush has declared it as the “first war of the 21st century.” The real significance of Black Tuesday (September 11, 2001) is that terrorism has shaken its security concern.

People in the developing countries live in the shadow of individual terrorism namely : Northern Ireland,-Spain, Sudan, Egypt, Iraq,. Palestine,. Israel, India, Philippines and many more. The US after the attack on Pentagon and World Trade Centre, has come under the-deadly blanket Of-terrorism.

There are two roads from here. One is questions of individual terrorism. A global war against terrorism has-now been talked about. But a techno-military intelligence approach by powerful country with the most sophisticated technology did not prevent the most horrifying individual terrorism. A war against terrorism with the traditional instruments of strikes, kidnappings and the like has never fully worked anywhere. And there are human costs associated with counter approach—in the form of an infringement of civil liberties. 

To curb the activities of terrorists in India, the government of India passed the Terrorists and Destructive Activities (Prevention) Bill in May, 1985. This bill contained strict measures to fight terrorism. It provided for death penalty for a terrorist whose action leads to the death of citizens. It also provided for rigorous imprisonment from 3 to 7 years for acts of terrorism. The Union government approved on October 6, 2001, an ordinance—Preventions of Terrorism Ordinance-2001 (POTO), which will give the government the authority of some strict laws against terrorism which has lapsed following the repeal of TADA (Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Prevention) Act.

Bad economic conditions and unemployment in Border States enable the terrorists to get fresh recruits. The terrorism will continue until its roots in political & social sphere are pulled out.