EXAMPLE OF SUCCESSFUL PEOPLE: DO AS THEY DO!
Why some people are successful and some are not, what is the difference between them? Below are the principles that successful people follow. Be bold, and you will be among them. 

1. They do not have a backup plan
Of course when there is a backup plan, you sleep much better at night. But when your nerves are strained to the limit new interesting thoughts and ideas come to your mind. It happens so that most of these ideas lead to success. 

2. Successful people work, work and work
Successful people work hard because they know that they can lose everything. No one will work instead of them. Have you ever heard about the rule of 10,000 hours? The main idea of this rule is working for 10, 000 hours in order to become a professional in the field you’ve chosen. If we talk about time frames – 10, 000 hours corresponds to 7 years of continuous work. 

3. Successful people don’t go with the crowd and don’t go with the flow
The road to success is not easy and it can be very long as it contradicts expectations of others. This is not a wide asphalt road that every person will choose; it is a thorny path with obstacles which is chosen by not many people. 

4. Successful people do not rest on their laurels
This is a very good principle when after achieving a goal there is a different idea and goal appears that you want to achieve. Successful people do not rest, they work hard in order to conquer one peak after another. 

5. Ability to sale
Marketing genius of our days is Steve Jobs. He could not just sell, he was able to convey to the masses love for his creation, and a burning desire to pass it to others. He was able to attract talented professionals who were charged by his incredible power. Now we should understand that anyone who wants to become successful should know how to sell. All successful people sell something, the only difference is that they sell different things and do it differently. 

6. Don’t be proud
Successful people are able to admit their mistakes and know whom they owe their success to. They do not hesitate to laugh at their blunders and they are ready to ask for help. After all, they are people just like us! 