NATIVE US SIGHTS
WRITTEN BY BATISHCHEVA ANNA CATEGORY: TRAVEL AND RECREATION
Facebook Twitter  Share
Every nation has its own sights because the every nation makes its history that will be spoken and written about as long as it will be remembered. 

There are so many amazing and really wonderful sights in US. Some people say that they are typical, but most people do not agree with this statement, because all of these sights are beautiful, interesting and attractive in its own way. Every year thousands of tourists visit them, because they are really beautiful. 

So let’s read and enjoy the information about familiar places to somebody, but still amazing. 

1. Off the road in California there is Dinosaurs Park. Wondrous creatures are presented here in their full size. You can climb them and even explore them from the inside. The real miracle of antiquity. What else do the children need? 

2. Do you know where the Stonehenge is situated? No, it’s not what you are thinking about…It’s situated in Nebraska! The local artists have built their own Stonehenge out of 38 cars painted in silver. 

3. Sometimes people create very beautiful things out of the garbage, at the same time helping the nature. In North Dakota you will be able to observe 7 sculptures made of scrap metal along the land plot of 38 miles. One sculpture “Flying geese” created by Gary Graf received the Guinness Prize as the largest sculpture made of scrap metal. 

4. Have you ever been to a cave house? Go and visit Utah! The house consists of 14 furnished rooms with unusual round clock. A natural red rock cave has been transformed into this spectacular home. 

5. America is famous for its huge animal sculptures. The oldest one is Lucy the Elephant. The sculpture is situated in New Jersey and its weight is about 90 tons. It was built in 1881 by the director of the real estate agency for promotion purposes. 
6. The world-famous American donut, which became more popular after the premier of the “Mars Attacks!” movie and Randy Newman’s video. Even donuts can be popular. 

7. US has its own legends and unusual heroes. Paul Bunyan, for example, is a lumberman who has become a hero of many legends, tales and stories. He is usually described as a giant of unusual skill. 

8. And Stonehenge again! Now in the Shenandoah Valley. It’s a canonical model of megalithic structures that closely remind the real one. 

9. Have you seen the largest milk bottle? Believe me or not, it looks quite unusual and cute. A huge bottle was built in Boston and its capacity is 58,620 liters. What milkman has brought it there, I wonder? 

10. In 1974 some artists “buried” roadsters in fully symmetrical poses on cow pasture in Amarillo, Texas. 

Everybody needs to appreciate traditions and sights of the country, because they were created by your ancestors and were passed to next generations.
