Threats to Nation Building Process

 

India is a nation still in the making. Nation building processes are at work. Many nationalities continue to exist together. Total literacy, social development and economic development are yet to reach its peak. Political development and democracy are yet to reach its culmination. Meanwhile different fissiparous tendencies manifest in asserting various identities are raising its head. The issues of communalism, linguism, casteism, terrorism, have created problems and posing serious challenges to our nation building.

After Independence we adopted modern Western concepts of political systems like universal adult franchise, Parliamentary form of government, separate organs of government rule of law, etc. But our country was backward. Poverty, illiteracy, lack of industrial development, rising populations, socio-economic inequality were some of the features of our country remaining underdeveloped. So develop sets of institutions were imposed in underdeveloped society. Social development could not have a pace with the political development. In the West, social development preceded the political development and hence there was a balance between polity and society. In India a chasm developed between society and polity. Later on these political institutions either were distorted or went corrupt and it became difficult to solve the rising social, economic and political problems.

The number of poor people rose drastically with the rise in population. More than 40% of our people live below poverty line. Only half of our population can read or write. What a tremendous socioeconomic inequality but everyone has a right to vote. Naturally people are either carried away by money or their traditional loyalties during voting. Some vested interests do try to manipulate this factor deliberately to influence in their favour. The efforts at eradicating poverty and making people literate were not whole hearted. The political will was lacking and that is why we see such a depressing scenario today.

Ever since Independence the polity was centralized. The federal sentiments were not given enough consideration. Article 356 to impose President’s rule was used arbitrarily to settle political scores. Regional aspirations were not given due importance and recognition. Economic development was not even, hence regional imbalance developed. Some regions advanced at the cost of other regions. As a result various regional parties emerged to represent the regional aspirations of the people, e.g, DMK in Tamil Nadu, Telugu Desam in AP, National Conference in J & K. Democratic movements began to fulfil the demands of regionalism. The demands to have separate states grew from the parent state. Local and regional interests started having priority over national interests. It affected the national interests because many of the national problems and issues are still not solved.

Language was another bone of contention. Indian society being multilingual, every language has a right to prosper and enrich itself. Hindi is a national language. English is a link language. But a feeling grew in Southern states that Hindi was being imposed on them. They feel a threat to their regional languages. Many language riots took place in south in 1960s. There should be a common language and at the same time other regional languages should be allowed to develop. Hindi should not be considered as an imposition. It shall develop gradually which is essential for smooth functioning of administration. The feeling of narrowmindedness and parochialism should not be allowed to hamper the national broad outlook. That is why three-language formula was initiated and it is a good exercise. We can learn more languages in order to understand each other better.

Communalism and casteism are in fact most important threats to nation building processes. Both are parochial in nature and promote hatred, distrust in society often leading to tensions and riots. Castes, communities are very basic to one’s identities. One should look beyond these loyalties. In fact, education can play greater role in broadening one’s outlook. Political parties should play more constructive role in not promoting these traditional loyalties for securing votes. People should not fall in the manipulations of selfish politicians because ultimately it is the people who suffer the most during these tensions and riots.

In the last two decades, terrorism has affected the economic and social development of people most. Punjab was disturbed during 80’s, Assam was burning, and J&K is still burning. It disturbs the entire psychic of people. The people and administration are the targets. People feel totally insecure, economy gets totally ruined and development works get paralysed. In Assam and North East, the government is not able to control the terrorists and insurgents. The tragedy with these insurgents is that they get funds from across the border. It has really affected our national development.

Threats to our nation building processes are increasing day be day. When one gets solved or near the solution, other starts raising its ugly head. The need of the day is to go for integrated approach with taking steps to solve the poverty, illiteracy and population problems along with tough steps and stern action against the terrorists. The terrorists and criminals need no mercy. Tougher punishments should be provided for them in order to weed them out completely. Then only strong nation can emerge with developed economy and polity.