Brain Drain

Or 

Brain Circulation

 

 

‘Brain Drain’ means migration of highly trained manpower from one country to another. The alienation leads partly to the visible brain drain that in migration and invisible brain drain means loss of morale and creativity among those who still stay in India. Both visible and invisible brain drain produces a great national loss, which can’t be calculated in terms of money.

A UN report reveals that a brain drain of highly skilled professionals to well paid jobs in the first world costs Asia billions of dollars each year. These emigrants often achieve impressive professional and economic successes abroad. For example, few years back, Indian engineers were running more than 775 technology companies in California’s Silicon Valley that accounted for $3.6 b in sales and 16,600 jobs. But the connections between these Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) and their home country barely extended beyond holiday visits.

Indian policy makers now have an opportunity to transform the brain drain from a curse into an asset. Changes in the structure of competition in Information Technology industries have not only allowed the growth of software development in India, but also create the possibility of economic leap forging of a sort that was not possible in earlier ears. In many parts of the world, the “brain drain” is giving way to a process of “brain circulation” as talented immigrants who have studied and worked abroad increasingly return to their home land to pursue promising opportunities. As the engineers and other professionals return home –either temporarily or permanently –transfer not only technology and capital, but also managerial and institutional know how to formerly peripheral regions. They also link local producers more directly to the market opportunities and networks of more advanced economies.

The policy makers in India must learn from the experience of Taiwan, where brain circulation was critical to its shift from a peripheral source of cheap to a global leader in IT production. The challenge for India’s information Technology (IT) sector is to upgrade the software industry, an industry that currently produces primarily low value added services for export markets. As in Taiwan, Indian policy makers can accelerate the process of industrial upgrading by creating incentives for engineers to return to India both as policy advisors and as investors, entrepreneurs and managers.

With good employers, attractive working conditions, improved telecommunications, attractive working conditions, improved telecommunications, attractive salaries and the entrepreneurial climate in India today, young professionals and technocrats are turning back home and strengthening business ties in the process.