Human Cloning

 

Cloning is an advance technological invention for producing a genetic twin of a living thing, an organism that starts life with the same genes as its parents. In 1997, researchers at Scotland’s Institute, led by embryologist Ian Wilmot successfully cloned a sheep-named Dolly-from the cell of an adult ewe.

The ethics of cloning is an extremely controversial issue. The term is generally used to refer is generally used to refer to artificial human cloning; human clones in the form of identical twins are commonplace, with their cloning occurring during the natural process of reproduction.

There are two commonly discussed types of human cloning: therapeutic cloning and reproductive cloning. Therapeutic cloning involves cloning cells from an adult for use in medicine and is an active area of research. Reproductive cloning would involve making cloned humans. A third type of cloning called replacement cloning is theoretical possibility, and would be a combination of therapeutic and reproductive cloning.

Every such invention has merits and demerits. Human cloning could be misused to destroy the existing humanity and civilization. We have seen the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the spectrum of germs and chemical warfare. Scientists, philosophers, thinkers, philanthropists from all over the world spoke out against human cloning, prompted by fears that the world has taken a step further towards nightmare of humans replicated in the lab. The human cloning can rear the society to pieces; it can endanger the very existence of human being in this world.

Advocates of human therapeutic cloning believe the practice could provide genetically identical cells for regenerative medicine, and tissues and organs for transplantation. Such cells, tissues and organs would neither trigger an immune response nor require the use of immunosuppressive drugs. Both basic research and therapeutic development for serious diseases such as cancer, heart disease and diabetes, as well as improvements in burn treatment and reconstructive and cosmetic surgery, are areas that might benefit from such new technology.

 

Essay No. 02

 

Cloning Technology

Natural cloning occurs everywhere. All plants, some insects, algae, unicellular organisms that conduct mitosis or binary fissions, and identical twins are all clones of each other. As long as genetic make-up is the same they are considered clones. Cloning would bring endless potentially important benefits to everyday life. By being able to clone living organism, we can help endangered species such as tigers and many other nearly extinct animals from being wiped from the face of earth. The idea does not stop there. In the future, meat supplies and food sources will become scarce because of the increasing population and insufficiency of land to farm or breed. Therefore, with the technology of cloning, humans can clone essential and necessary animals such as cows and sheep and agricultural animals to provide us with food instead of wasting a lot of time in breeding them. If we start researching cloning technology now, in the near future we Will be able to make safe and healthy clones faster and more economically. Aside from the use of cloning technology to survive, we Can have the option of using cloning technology to save lives.

A simple idea which can be wildly in use in the future would be producing clones to be used for a person whose life is at risk due to a disease such as cancer or a defective organ. Using  organ transfer, we can transfer the healthy and operating organ f a clone to a person at risk. We can use clones to donate rate blood types. In the long term, this can bring cancer and many other diseases that can be deadly to an end. Many people might think of this as brutal because you are using a life to save another life however think about it; clones are not unique individuals that were produced through sexual reproduction by two partners therefore using them to save a unique, loved, and known individual is the right thing to do.

 Many times people say it is dangerous or not right. It is not at all dangerous. It only takes a cell and an egg to attempt to produce a clone. Something that folks have a fear of is the clone will be exactly like the person who it was cloned from. That statement is very wrong.

 It is true that the clone will have the same genetic make-up and contain the same characteristics. However, it will be very I different in terms of personality and thoughts.

 

Anyone who knows identical twins knows that they are very different from each other because many factors in the environment play a role in development; and if the clone grows up at a different time or in a different place, it will have an incredibly different personality. It is very likely that cloned organisms would have defective or deformed organs or functionalities; however that is today’s, technology. If cloning research resumes and is branded legal then scientists can surely improve and develop new technologies that would make cloning easier and more effective.

The technologies we are working on now are to help people with serious medical problems and to ensure a secure future. The world is in store for some major technological advances and everyone must be prepared to deal with controversial issues such as the one presented above. If one is not able to deal with change, then technology is just going to leave them behind. Like it or not technology is not going to stop progressing, so the world is going to have to learn to accept what is happening.

