Information Technology

Essay No. 01

Information Technology’ comprises computers, telecommunications, television, and audio-visual media. Development of software etc. Computer is the major segment of Information Technology which has permeated and grasped every sphere of existence of human society and become indispensable. The present day elegance, accuracy, become indispensable. The present day elegance, accuracy, sophistication, efficiency could have been made possible only with the invention of computers. Computers software’s are gradually becoming and decisive force in making important decisions. It has become the basis of modern scientific and technology inventions and researches.

IT has played an important role in making the Indian economy run at a much faster pace. Recent studies conducted by leading IT associations and business intelligence concern have shown that our country will require millions of IT professionals in the coming years. The world of computers, telecommunication, televisions, the internet and all other audio and visual media is facing rapid and radical changes presently. This has generated infinite and unimaginable new opportunities in education communication, commerce, manufacturing, agriculture, healthcare, leisure an entertainment and more particular the service sector. The emerging IT enabled service (ITES) segment has shown tremendous and revenues of jobs for the IT professional. It is a worthwhile to not that during the last 20 years , the IT industry’s present trend reflect more than 20 times increase in ITES-BP segments. 

Information technology can contribute tremendously in the economic development particularly rural area. It can become a prudent pooling intriguing the nation the remit localities that have so far feeling a sense of neglect, will be feeling of development. With computer education made compulsory from primary and middle level, we can hope and aspire that within next few years, India will become more interrogated and more economically robust.

 

Information Technology (IT)

Essay No. 02

When Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi showed his keen desire for getting a super computer from. America in the eighties; it seemed something strange to others. Even America looked upon Mr. Gandhi’s desire with the usual reluctance. Today. After two decades, India has emerged as globally recognized super software giant. When we synthesize the concepts of computers and telecommunications, we get the term Information Technology, which is a meta resource capable of being put to multifarious purposes governing several fields of activities.

Today, we have elaborate use of Information Technology’ in almost all fields of life, including agriculture, industry, banks, offices, post offices, educational institutions, communications, medicine, defence etc. The most resounding aspect of the Information Technology is the Internet and we have such new trendy terms as e-mail, e-commerce, e-governance, teleshopping, telemedicine and so on. The synthesis of satellite system has carried the concept of Information Technology to dizzy heights in its applicability and utility.

The most widespread use of Information Technology is through the system of interconnectivity among computers the world over. It has given us the Internet with the term. World Wide Web (www). Internet surfing has become not only a pastime with many housewives and curious young boys and girls but also innumerable businessmen who want to trade in any kind of commodities for sale or purchase. Exporters can find markets for their products and importers can contact the producer for the purpose of making purchases at reasonable rates. Scholars and professionals can get additional knowledge and solutions to the problems that pester them. In fact, the Internet has changed the world into a small village.

Information Technology can solve several problems such as poverty, illiteracy, disease, unemployment, corruption, law-lessness, etc. The quality of education in the classroom can be greatly improved through the use of computer. Some schools, colleges, universities and technical institutions in our country have overseas through links the IT.

In the field of telemedicine we find specialists treating patients lying in remote primary health centres. Sometimes even operations are performed through tele-surgery. Thus, information Technology can prove very useful in the field of healthcare and diagnosing, controlling and even preventing deadly diseases like cancer, heart attack, etc.

Thus, Information Technology can be of immense help in increasing avenues for employment. In fact, Business Outsourcing Process (BOP) has become very popular and has already provided jobs to thousands of people. In all major cities, we have offices, with business being run from home, teleshops and call centres of different companies.

IT has made banking much more accessible to common people who have got numerous facilities in the matter of maintaining their accounts and securing loans for individuals and business needs. Thus IT has given a great impetus to commercial and trade activities. It has helped all kinds of bank customers, housewives, students, traders, manufacturers, exporters, tourists, shopkeepers and others.

IT can also help in developing big infrastructure projects like nuclear plants, refineries, steel, cement, power and petroleum projects, airports, economic zones, space station, etc. At present India is a software giant and China is a hardware giant, and if they can join hands, they can perhaps solve all their own national problems. They can even conquer the whole world and bring prosperity with greatly improved quality of life.