AMERICA’S HISTORIC LANDMARKS – BALBOA PARK

Photo of Balboa Park
Facebook Twitter  Share
This magnificent park was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1977. It is situated in San Diego, California, and is really a very beautiful place in America. The park was named after the famous explorer and traveler Vasco Nunez de Balboa. Most of the trees here were planted by an American gardener Kate Sessions. Placed in reserve in 1835, it is one of the oldest sites in the United States dedicated to public recreational usage. Besides open areas and natural vegetation, it contains a variety of cultural attractions including museums, theaters, gardens, shops and restaurants as well as the San Diego Zoo. 
El Prado is one of the most popular places among visitors; it’s a long and very interesting alley. Most of the buildings along El Prado are in the Spanish Colonial Revival architecture style, a richly ornamented mixture of European Spanish architecture and the Spanish Colonial architecture of New Spain-Mexico. There are many museums that are situated in this park; among them are the San Diego Natural History Museum, the San Diego Model Railroad Museum, the San Diego Art Institute, the Museum of Photographic Arts, the San Diego Museum of Art, the San Diego Museum of Man, the Timken Museum of Art and the Reuben H. Fleet Science Center. 

Among the attractions that should be visited we would like to mention and the Bea Evenson Fountain, the latticed Botanical Building, the Reflection Pond and the San Diego Air & Space Museum. 

It’s should be noted that there are numerous gardens throughout the park, including the Japanese Friendship Garden, the Inez Grant Parker Memorial Rose Garden, the Casa del Rey Moro Garden, the Cactus Garden, Alcazar Gardens, the Botanical Building and the Marston House Garden, Palm Canyon, and Zoro Garden. 
To enjoy the theatre and to listen to music you can in the local the Spreckels Organ Pavilion with one of the world's largest outdoor pipe organs. A huge number of tourists are attracted to the Starlight Bowl, an outdoor amphitheatre and The Casa Del Prado Theatre. 

For those who prefer more active relaxation there are numerous clubs for street bowling, equestrian sports, chess and bridge. Located in the eastern third of the park is the Morley Field Sports Complex, which includes the Balboa Park Golf Complex, which contains a huge golf club, the San Diego Velodrome, baseball and softball fields, the USTA-honored Balboa Tennis Club and tennis courts, archery ranges, the public swimming pool and many others interesting things to make your vacation unforgettable. 

