MEN’S WEAKNESSES

Arm-wrestling between a man and a woman
Facebook Twitter  Share
Men are considered to be strong and invincible, but despite of this view, men do have their own weaknesses. 

Genetic vulnerability of men

Males, unlike females, do not have the second X chromosome which contains genes that protect against various infections. Thanks to the genetic structure, women are easier to tolerate stress, fatigue, hunger. Viability is much higher in women than in men, women’s constitution is much stronger than men’s, but women are weaker in respect of the muscles. Besides all this, men need more oxygen, because they make fewer breaths, but they are deeper. 

Men’s intolerance

Many women envy men because they have more muscle and less fat. It's easier for them to lose weight than women. But there is also the opposite side of the coin. The initial energy of the men is higher, but women have more reserves, that’s why women are more enduring. Thanks to the reserves of fat and sex hormones, women’s muscles are able to use fat faster than the muscles of men. 

In addition, fast exhaustive physical capabilities are observed in men. In every ten years female endurance is reduced by 2% and male’s – by 10%.

Men's brains work differently

Sex hormones play a primary role in brain development. Right hemisphere of the men is formed faster than the left one. Throughout life, the right hemisphere is dominant in men. That is why it is easier for them to become architects, artists and builders. 

As for the female brain, the hemispheres have no particular specialization; both hemispheres are involved in the work while solving any problem. 

Men’s warm temperament

The latest results show that men fall in love more often and faster than women. Many studies have shown that men are ready to fall in love after the fourth date, but many women even after the 15-th date are not ready to say whether they like the man or not. Men need only 7 seconds to understand whether he likes the woman or not. That's why they say that men are ready to fall in love at first sight. 

Men’s vulnerability

Men experience strong emotions and may even fall into a deep depression. Women are able to control their emotions. 

Are men jealous? 

The man is basically jealous because of the owner instinct and on the sexual basis. That is why men's perception of female unfaithfulness is much stronger. Very rarely men are ready to forgive female’s unfaithfulness. 

But despite all these vulnerable sides, men are the stronger sex for us, the support and the stone wall, behind which the women can hide and feel safe! 


