Reservation in Private Sector

 Essay No. 01

The basic concept of providing reservation to downtrodden society, called Schedule Caste and Schedule Tribe, initially through our constitution has altogether changed new. Reservation might have provided some relief to the people from poor and downtrodden options that had scarce opportunities but the same could have been provided through subsidized better education and other support services. Once a concession or any kind of privilege is extended to a particular class, it is impossible for any government to withdraw it in a democracy where voting decides the fate of any party.

Now the point of extending reservation to the private sector is also being raised from the political platform little realizing the disastrous consequences for the country. It is argued by protagonists of extending reservation in private sector also that with the globalization and due to rapid narrowing of the state sector on account of privatization and the withdrawal of state from many spheres under the liberalization regime the little room is deft for the reserved class to get jobs. If the prevalence of economic discrimination is the justification for reservation in public sector why can it not be the reason for reservation in private sector? In countries like US, Northern Ireland, Malaysia and other in Latin America, affirmative action was developed from the very beginning both in public and the private sector. It is further demanded that India must enact an Equal employment Opportunity Act so as to provide safeguards against discrimination.

During the short regime of Mr. V.P. Singh, the then PM, several youth lost their lives against the recommendations of commission. It is a bitter truth that reservation has resulted in mediocrity and repudiation of quality. With the help of legislative support of reservation, the ineligibles have claimed to the high posts and the better qualified, with high marks, have unjust been looking the injustice being done to them for no fault of theirs.

This is the demand of time that the present policy of reservation event in public sector should be reviewed honestly without considering its political repercussion for the real good of the general its political repercussion for the real good of the general public. So far reservation in private sector is concerned; it is neither justified nor have any propriety keeping in view the objectives of the private concern.

 Essay No. 02

Reservation in Private Sector

“It is a bitter truth that reservation has led to mediocrity and repudiation of quality. With the help of legislative support of reservation, the ineligible have been developed to the high posts and the better qualified with high marks have just been looking the injustice being done to them for no fault of theirs.”

The basic concept of providing reservation to downtrodden society called schedule caste and schedule tribe, initially through our constitution has altogether changed now. Reservation might have provided some relief to the people from poor and downtrodden sections who had scarce opportunities but the same could have been provided through subsidized better education and other support services. Once a concession or any kind of privilege is extended to a particular class it is impossible for any government to withdraw it in a democracy where voting decides the fate of any party.

Indian democracy is called by some thinkers as monocracy, where the illiterate mob, decides the fate of the political parties. The privilege of reservation once given was extended every time as to withdrawing of this privilege means definite removal of the ruling party from the power in the next election. The opposition party or other regional parties can assure to grant the privilege if voted for power. This issue of reservation has been a political concession to garner vote banks. Reservation in government jobs was opposed many times by other classes and not justifiable after 56 years of independence.

Reservation means job to inefficient and incompetents at the cost of other competent and more efficient intellectuals. In the present scenario the things have altogether changed. Both government and private sector are consolidating educational and training facilities and the government is subsidizing education even at IIMS so there is no ground for keeping on with the reservation policy.

Now the point of extending reservation to the private sector is also being raised from the political platform, little realizing the disastrous consequences for the country. It is argued to protagonists of extending reservation in private sector also, that with the globalization and owing to rapid narrowing of the state sector on account of privatization and the withdrawal of state from many spheres under the liberalization regime the little room is left for the reserved class to get jobs. If the prevalence of economic discrimination is the justification for the reservation in public sector may can it not be the reason for reservation in private sector. In countries like U.S., Northern Ireland, Malaysia and other in Latin America, affirmative action was progressed from the very beginning both the public and the private sector. As such the demand for introducing reservation in the private sector is being raised in order to set off the long injustice to the reserved category or so called untouchables. It is further’ demanded that India must enact an Equal Employment Opportunity Act (as in United States) so as to provide safeguards against discrimination. This could be supplemented by affirmative action in terms of reservation in some kinds of jobs and other markets.

So far private sector is concerned, it is purely a commercial concern, set up to earn profit or investible surplus to earn more profit. The objective of the private sector to earn profit can’t be achieved if it is forced to run by less competent people. This is an age of globalization, liberalization where no business can be successful if it has incompetent, inefficient manpower. Success in the competition needs highly skilled, most competent, most dedicated and result oriented working class, not the people who has been supported with the stick of reservation. Everyone knows that any private enterprise grows with the support and hard work of the specialized and technically trained, well educated highly motivated manpower. How can a company be expected to carry on with the staff employed under the reservation quota. Not only from the point of efficiency, competence is important, it must also be kept in mind, that for the last 56 years, the general class candidates have been suffering a lot because of the reservation provided to their counter-parts.

During the short regime of Mr. V.P. Singh, the then P.M. several youth lost their lives against the recommendation of Mandal Commission. It is a bitter truth that reservation has resulted in mediocrity and repudiation of quality. With the help of legislative support of reservation, the ineligibles have climbed to the high posts and the better qualified with high mark, have just been looking the injustice being done to them for no fault of others.

“Reservation is against the fundamental principles of humanity, it is against the dictates of reason that a man should be reason of birth be denied or given extra privileges.”

This is the demand of time that the present policy of reservation even in public sector should be reviewed honesty without considering its political repercussion for the real good of the general public. So far reservation in private sector is concern, it is neither justified nor have any propriety keeping in view the objectives of the private concern. Providing any sort of facilities, subsidies and financial aid can be justified, but reservation in private sector shall