SIMPLE LIFE LESSONS FROM MAHATMA GANDHI

Mahatma Gandhi is a great leader, a man of his word and a true fighter who gave an example of correct thinking and simple living. When we hear his name only such words as inspiration, honesty, non-violence and outstanding leadership qualities come to our minds. The ideas of this great man were very clear and strong, and it was enough for achieving the goals. He decided to leave his fairly successful career as a lawyer, and struggle with other fighters for independence. This person has all the qualities of a successful leader. Until now, his lessons inspire thousands of people. May be his ideas will be valuable and useful for you. 

Innovation
Non-violence was one of the hugest and greatest innovations of Gandhi. None of the histories has a fighter for freedom who uses the weapon of non-violence. The only leader who was successful in using the weapon of non-violence was Mahatma Gandhi and his Dandi March was a great and successful example of using non-violence weapon. 

Simplicity
This man was famous not only for his morality and strength of will and mind, but also for his simplicity. To say that Mahatma Gandhi was a simple man is to say nothing about his simplicity. He was a great leader but his way of life, his books and teachings were very simple. His simplicity is reflected in his ideas and the way of living, and, it goes without saying, simplicity was his greatest virtue. 

Truth
Gandhi believed in a true life and always followed the truth. He believed that the truth makes the life easier. He thought that a person will face a lot of hardships for being truthful but at the end you will be a real winner. 

Constant learning
This person believed in constant learning and his passion for this learning gave him real authority among people. His lessons were extremely popular because they motivated people for active living. 

Sacrifice
This is the quality that people admire about this man. He sacrificed a lot in order to struggle for freedom and to achieve it. He sacrificed himself in order India received the independence. He was a very simple person and denied many positions in Government. 

His way of living is a special message for us
Despite being a great speaker and wonderful writer, Gandhi spoke very slowly when it was needed. His teachings were short, but very powerful. He always wanted his way of life to an example for others. Incredible, how his simple life helped him to achieve freedom and well being for his nation. 

Energetic
Gandhi is the leader who was fasting, but it’s didn’t lower his confidence. He was always energetic and could encourage people to fight for the freedom of the country. 

He never used his power to subdue anybody. History knows a lot of fighters for freedom who shed bloods to gain freedom, but Gandhi was the only one who believed in and used the weapon of non-violence. Later Gandhi became an inspirational example in other countries to stand up against British rule. Martin Luther King and Nelson Mandela were inspired by this man. 

The key to his strength was his stress-free life. He prayed a lot and had been meditating for hours. He became an ideal for many people, but Mahatma Gandhi continued to live his simple life.
Live simply like the great leader did and feel the difference yourself! Perhaps he may be considered to be the first intentional minimalist. He ate food he grew himself; he wore the same piece of cloths that he made himself out of raw cotton. Despite this he became the most powerful person without weapon in his hands. 
His main strength is wisdom that he shared with others. Let’s be determined and strong! Let’s make this world a better place for our living! 


