10 WORST CHARITIES AND WHY THEY ARE WORST
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
10
Facebook Twitter  Share
When you donate money to charity, then, of course, you expect that they will go to charity. But, unfortunately, there is an entire industry called "charity," which masterfully raises money and uses it not on purpose. 
Center for Investigative Reporting (CIR) with the support of the media Tampa Bay Times and CNN have identified 50 Worst Charities of America, which in the last ten years spent more than a billion dollars on administrative costs. 

In some cases, such as with the organization Cancer Fund of America, from the raised 20 dollars, 20 cents is automatically used for the organization’s cause. Among the 50 worst charities an average of 4 cents from every donated dollar went to organization’s cause. 

Some of these charities were suspected before, but even after it was announced about their foul work, many consumers did not know where the donated money went on. 

Many of the charities that receive money from donors, deposit the money in the accounts of for-profits organizations, and such charities try to call themselves in tune with the charitable company, which is popular among the people. 

Here's a list of 10 worst American organizations, which was compiled by CIR, supported by Tampa Bay Times, with the percentage of funds that went to the intended purpose: 

1. Kids Wish Network (2.5%)

2. Cancer Fund of America (0.9%)

3. Children's Wish Foundation International (10.8%)

4. American Breast Cancer Foundation (5.3%)

5. Firefighters Charitable Foundation (8.4%)

6. Breast Cancer Relief Foundation (2.2%)

7. International Union of Police Associations (0.5%)

8. National Veterans Service Fund (7.8%)

9. American Association of State Troopers (8.6%)

10. Children's Cancer Fund of America (5.3%)

Charitable organizations are ranked on the basis of how much money they spend on fundraisers. The organization Kids Wish Network paid about $ 110 million out of the raised 128 million dollars to their fundraisers. 

Here are several tips on how to avoid the donation of funds to for-profit fundraisers by phone: 

• Never donate over the phone, better send a check or use the on-line payment and send the money directly to the charity organization you are interested in. 

• If you want to donate money, first of all research how the organization will spend it. 

• Learn about the organization, using a special charity sites, including GuideStar, BBB Wise Giving Alliance and Charity Navigator. 

• Use the Internet to find out other people's opinion about a particular charity organization. 

