A Seat for Indian in the Security Council

 

       Synopsis: Had India no teen a British colony in 1945 when the UNO was born, India would have already been a permanent member of the most powerful Security Council with Beta.  The Council is to be reshaped and restructured soon to make it more representative and decorative.  Udder the expansion there would be 5 more permanent members one each from Asia, Africa and Latin America besides Germany and Japan. India has formally staked its claim to the permanent seat from Asian region.  But Pakistan will oppose India’s election to the Council tooth and nail.  America’s support is crucial in the matter and the recent meeting of Prime Minister Gujral with President Clinton in New York is wean as a change n the US attitude towards Indian in a global content.  Really a favorable development but things are not as easy and smooth as they appear to be.

            India has formally staked its claim to a permanent sir on the Security Council.  Prime Minster Goral’s address in the UN General Assembly on 24 September, 1997 has made it amply clear. He also had half an hour meeting with President Bill Clinton of the US and sought his support for a permanent seat in the Council.  And if the indications are to be believed, perhaps we may support Indies’ candidature but it depends so much on future developments before   the actual expansion of the council takes place.  In the coming months a number of the US dignitaries are scheduled to visit India culminating in President Bill Clinton’s visit in February 1997. Meanwhile may other counters from Africa and Asia have strongly supported India’s claim to the permanent seat in the UN Security Council.

            The US has declared the Pakistan based terrorist outfit Harkatul-Ansar as terrorist organization, and the other extremist group Kashmir Liberation Front, again sponsored and supported by Islamabad, is under watch and may be soon declared a terrorist outfit by the US Administration.  This action of the US branding the Hark at as a terrorist group is although a belated one, and yet it is has gladdened the Indian establishment.  Now, Pakistan finds itself in a very embracing position as it has amply proved and highlighted the Indian contenting that Pakistan was involved in terrorist activates in India.

            There are certain political compulsions behind these firings and military skirmished.  There has been long drawn out communal violence in Pakistan resulting in thousands of deaths and destructing of property on a large scalpel The Pakistani economy has been in shambles and corruption has been boundless.  Moreover the war next door in Afghanistan threatens to enter into Pakistan.  Therefore, Pakistani rulers find it convenient to keep the LOC alive to divert the attention of the Pak public from ties own failures and bungling.  In the words of some experts the Pakistani leaders have turned the LOC into a lifeline for Pakistan. Unfortunately, Pakistan’s one onto a gene in her relation with India is that of Kashmir. 

            There has been decline n India’s population growth rate of 2.32 per cent of 1961-71 to 2.23 per cent per acumen in 1981-91.  But this decline is not enough and demands some urgent and effective if not drastic measures in respect of family planning and population stability. The country’s present total fertility rate (TFR) is 3.5 which is quite high and it was targeted to be brought down to 2.1 by the end of the century but according to recent report of the Registrar General of India it would remain around 2.5 per cent even by the year 2016.  This reflects how miserably we have failed in family planning programmes and population-control.  China has considerably brought down its FTR and population growth rate but India has been left far behind. China is today the most populous country but in coming year it would be replaced by India at the present rate of growth of 2 per cent per annum or average of 3 children per woman.  The fertility rate in even higher in U.P., Bihar, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Punjab.  The total fertility rate is the highest in UP at 5.5 per cent.

            Today India’s estimated population is over 953 million.  According to the decadal 1991 census it was 846.3 million.  It makes India the second largest populous country in the world.  Sixteen per cent of the world’s populations live in India with only 2.42 per cent of the total world area.  Population-wise Uttar Pradesh is the largest State with 16.44 per cent population followed by Bihar with 10.21 per cent and Maharashtra with 9.33 per cent.  Bombay is the most populous city with 12.60 million population followed by Calcutta and Delhi with 11.02 and 8.42 million population respectively.  These facts and figures underline the failure of our strategy to stabilize and limit the population to manageable limits. 

            The US has declared the Pakistan based terrorist outfit Harkatul-Ansar as terrorist organization, and the other extremist group Kashmir Liberation Front, again sponsored and supported by Islamabad, is under watch and may be soon declared a terrorist outfit by the US Administration.  This action of the US branding the Hark at as a terrorist group is although a belated one, and yet it is has gladdened the Indian establishment. India should strive hard to see that her interest are served an promoted to the maximum through strategic alliances, understandings and mutual cooperation, however, without compromising with our long cherished principles of neutrality, equality, non-alignment, independent policy and judgment in matters of CTBT, nuclear option and universal and time-bound disarmament.