WANT TO CHANGE YOUR CAREER? THINK THIS STEP OVER

Business people
Facebook Twitter  Share
When you do not feel satisfied at the workplace where you are, a desire to change things can be tempting. Of course you can change not only your profession, but also a place of work, staff and the style of working. 

It’s a very risky step. New position often means reduced payroll, development of your reputation, etc. It goes without saying, such changes require additional training or education. 

Before you decide to change the place of work and position, think over the following questions. 

1. What don’t you like in your current position?
If you cannot articulate the reasons why you want to change the workplace, it is possible that at the new place you will find yourself in a similar situation of dissatisfaction. 

Do you want to change the workplace in order to run away from your manager, colleagues or projects you accomplish? Many problems that seem to be natural for your position, may in fact be rooted in the special features of your workplace or your employer. Such problems are easier to resolve at the current job, than to change radically your career. 

2. What do you like about your position? 
Very often dissatisfaction with some parts of your job may be overlapped by huge advantages and great satisfaction from the work you accomplish. Think about positive aspects of your job and place where you work. Financial bonuses, staff, interesting and important projects can be considered huge advantages of your current job. Think about things you can lose by changing the place of work. 

3. Are you familiar with the desired field of work? 
It will be useful to read as much information as possible about the field you want to work in. But it’s much better to talk to people who work in this field, they can provide you with more realistic information. These people can open your eyes and may be you will see this field from the other angle. 

You can look for such specialists through social or professional networks. Organize meetings with them or buy them dinner in exchange for information. 

4. Are you passionate about your desired field of work? 
If your desire depends only on higher payroll, then, most likely, you won’t enjoy this new job for a long time. Strong personal attachment to the new job can ease the transition period. Without such interest and desire to work you won’t be fully satisfied with what you do. 

5. How your skills can be used in the new field?
The more new the desirable field is for you, the less useful your skills may be. Talk to people who work in this sphere and find out in what way your skills can be applicable in the new field. If these people won’t see the connection, then your future employer won’t see it either. 

If the answers to these questions will strengthen in you the desire to change the place of work, then do it! However there is no guarantee that you will enjoy a new job, even though you have good reason to believe that the risk is worth it. Even this new path won’t be smooth, chances that you’ll enjoy it are very high. 

Keep in mind that your change should be smooth. Try to prepare for it, if necessary, visit the courses that help you to upgrade your skills. These preparations will help you to smooth out the change of your position. 


