My favourite Artiste 
or
My favourite Singer
or
Lata Mangeshkar my favourite Singer
 

All artistes is a professional performer. He could be a dancer a singer or an actor. There are a number of prominent playback singers in the India music industry. Lata Mangeshkar has appealed to me the most among all the singers. She has ruled over the hearts of millions of her listeners throughout the world y the magic of her voice. She has a sweet fresh and impressive voice. Lata Mangeshkar was born on September 28, 1929 at Indore in Madhya Pradesh. Her father Dinanath Mangeshkar owned a theatrical company. He was also a reputed classical singer of the Gwalior school. Lata was the eldest in the family of four daughter and one son. Her sisters are Asha , Usha , Meena, and brother is Hridayanath.

Lata received singing lessons from her father from the age of five. She also studied with Aman Ali Khan Sahib and later with Amanat Khan and Pandit Tulsidas Sharma. Her father’s recital and lessons left a strong impression on her as did the songs of K.l .Saigal that was her favorite singer and idol.

Lata father died when she was very young. Master Vinayak Damodar Karnataka the owner of Navyug Chitrapat Movie Company and a close friend of the Mangeshkar family took care of them. He helped lata get started in a career as a siner and actress. She entered Marathi films as a playback singer at the age of thirteen. Her first playback song was Natli Chaaitrachi Navalai for the film Phili Mangalagaur released in 1942. Her first Hindi song Mata EK Sapoot ki Duniya Badal de tu was for a Marathi film Gajabhau released in 1943.

Vinayak Rao who was happy at Lata’s performance in Gajabhau signed her as a staff artist on a monthly salary of Rs.60 in 1943. It was increased to Rs. 350 at the time Vinayak died in 1948. In 1945 the company shifted its headquarters to Bombay. Lata move out into the big city.

After master Vinayak death in 1948 music director Ghulam Haier mentored Lata as a singer. Initially Lata imitated Noor Jehan famous singer of that era but later she develop her own style of singing. Gradually she earned a name for herself and her family.

In 1950Lata sang sons composed by various acclaimed music directors of the period including AnilBiswas, Shankar Jaikishan , Naushad , S.D Burman, C. Ramchandra , Hemant Kumar , Anand ji and Madan Mohan etc. the 1960 thrust Lata mangeshkar to being known as the undisputed leading female playback singer in Hindi cinema and it lasted for four decades.

Lata mangeshkar has help budding music directions by offering to render playbacks for them. Even actress found a place of honor for themselves through Lata voice. Her melodious voice has brought success to many lyric writers and music directors.

Lata has also composed music for some films with the adopted name of Anad Gar. They were Ram Ram Pahune, Mohityanchi Manjula . Maratha Tetuka Meleaea; Sahi Manseord  and  Tambadi Ati. She acted in Pahilli Mangala Gaur, Majhe Baal; Gajabhau , Samudra Mandir. She produced Marathi and Hindi films like Wadal Kanchan and Lenin. There are innumerable films which have hit songs of Lata. Some of the films which need special mentionare Anarkali  Amar Prem Ram Teri Ganga Maili Veer Zara.

Shealsosangseveralplaybacksongsfor Marathi films composed by Hridaynath Mangeshkar , Vasant Prabhu , Srinivas Khale ,Suhir Phadke etc. During 1960 and 1970 she also sang several popular engali songs composed by Salil Chowdhury and Hemant Kumar.

It was after India losses in the India China war in 1962 that Lata sang the song, Aye mere Watan ke Logon, Zara Aankh me bhar lo paani ‘ at a concert. The song written by Pradeep and composed by C.Ramchandra, moved the then Indian prime minister, pt Jawaharlal Nehru to tears. Nehru confessed ‘Beti tune mujhe rula diya’.

Lata Mangeshkar contribution for making music popular throughout India and the world is incalculable. She has reigned supreme throughout the last six and a half decades. She has dedicated her life to music.

Lata Mangeshkar is the recipient of many awards and honors’ both within the country and abroad. The government of Madhya Pradesh has instituted an annual award of Rs.1 lakh in her name. she was honored with the Padma Shri , Padma Bhushan , Padma Vbhushan , Dada Sahib Phalke Award , Film fare Best Female playback Award etc.

Apart from her film songs Lata adapted the works of leading poets and set them to music for private recordings. She has recorded devotional songs composed by Sant Tukaram a religious poet of Maharashtra. Her recording of the Bhagwat Gita in Sanskrit is her crowning achievement. Lata is a legend in her lifetime. She is undeniably the best singer of India.