BEST COUNTRIES FOR TOURISM

1. Sri Lanka
Destroyed by tsunami in 2004 and civil war 1983-2009, Ceylon became an unwelcome place for the most of travelers. But the conflict is over, investments in the tourism have been increased significantly, the number of visitors steadily grows. Sri Lanka is one of the best places that are worth visiting, it’s famous for its’ white beaches, the ocean and low prices. 

2. Montenegro
Nature has been generous to Montenegro; nature’s creativity can be seen in the charming Bay of Kotor and beaches along the Riviera. Going to Montenegro don’t forget the bathing suit and comfortable tennis shoes, because the beauty of the country is not limited to the coast. 

3. South Korea
South Korea is not fully explored by tourists, and few people can say that they been there. South Korea is a mysterious country for tourists, and a great number of visitors try to find the answers to this mystery. 

4. Ecuador
Certainly, a trip to Ecuador is not short and not cheap, but it has everything that your soul desires: snow-capped mountains and volcanoes, rafting down impassable rivers and wild jungle, exotic Indian settlements and beautiful cities, and of course, the jewel of Ecuador - Galapagos Islands. 

5. Slovakia
There are not many world-famous attractions; however, the natural beauty, elegance, architecture, beautiful palaces and the local color of this country has its fans. Significant plus in Slovakia is not a great number of tourists. 

6. Solomon Islands
Lost paradise in the Pacific Ocean contains 30 islands and atolls. The year-round warm, quiet and peaceful. Tourists can go diving, surfing, fishing, sailing, snorkeling and enjoy other water activities. 

7. Iceland
Volcanoes, rivers and waterfalls, beautiful meadows and lunar landscapes, covered with craters and geysers. Tours to Iceland interest those who do not like hot weather, but happy to go fishing for salmon in the prolific rivers and swim in the hot springs. 

8. Turkey
Mysterious landscapes of Cappadocia, amazing mountain lakes of central regions of Turkey, thousands of islands of Lycia, and plenty of opportunities for new discoveries and adventures. All this is Turkey - far and near, familiar and unfamiliar, accessible and always welcoming. 

9. Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic today represents an actively developing resort, popular among tourists from all over the world. But the beauty of this island is unchangeable. Here you have access to all the pleasures of a beach holiday in the islands. 

10. Madagascar
Madagascar is one of the most amazing and unexplored islands. Primitive and vibrant nature of this island will give any traveler an unforgettable experience. Madagascar is sometimes called "Tahiti of the Indian Ocean." 

