HOW TO HIDE YOUR LIKES ON FACEBOOK?

Facebook
Facebook Twitter  Share
Recently more and more people want to make their social network preferences private. Restaurants, stores, sport teams, charities, support groups…you “like” them on Facebook and everybody knows it. And who knows, may be your likes will be judged by your friends. 

Your social friends can misunderstand your likes. For example, you liked a page with the description of fifteen different kinds of vodka. That step will make your family and friends to be afraid for your health. And in actual fact, you liked this page because you wanted to get a discount or a coupon in this store that sells not only vodka. 

No matter what pages you like and what you don’t, what you can do for sure is to choose and change the privacy settings. You are to decide whether you will be the one to see your likes, or may be you want your friends to follow your likes. 

Let’s look at the ways that help to keep some applications private. After all, there is no need to display all your life. 

Types of likes: 
There are several types of likes on Facebook. If you open your profile, you will see different sections or categories such as music, books, movies, TV, games, sport teams, entertainment, interests and other pages. 

You may control the list of friends who see your likes on the category level, but you can’t hide individual things that you liked. For example, you may hide the whole Sport Teams category from everybody, but you want be able to hide your like of the concrete sports team page. 

How to make you likes private?

1. Log in to Facebook and click on Timeline section. 

2. Then click on "Likes".

3. Click the "Edit" button on the right side of the page. 

4. You can select the level of privacy. You will see several options in this section: everybody, friends, friends of friends, only me and custom. If you choose “Only Me”, then no one except you will see your preferences of the categories you liked. 

You can choose different private settings for each of the categories, but, unfortunately, as we mentioned earlier, you can not hide individual likes of the concrete pages. 

And one last note! Facebook is known for the fact that very often they change the settings and the ways of management of your private settings. We recommend you from time to time to check privacy settings. There is always the possibility of automatic readjustment of the privacy settings. 

Keep your finger on the pulse and try to act safely at the social network! 
