MOST SUCCESSFUL BUSINESS WOMEN IN THE WORLD. TOP-10
WRITTEN BY BATISHCHEVA ANNA CATEGORY: OTHERS
Facebook Twitter  Share
1. Indra Nooyi

She is the Chairman and CEO of PepsiCo, one of the largest food and drink companies in the world. Due to her successful work the PepsiCo shares just for this year have increased by 12%, while total revenue climbed to $60 billion.

 


2. Irene Rosenfeld

Irene Rosenfeld is the Chairman and CEO of Kraft Foods. Due to her innovative and campaigns Kraft Foods has taken the second place in the market of developing countries. She was able to get around such a powerful investor like Mr. Buffett.

 



3. Patricia Woertz

She is the president of Archer Daniels Midland (AMD), one of the largest agri-biological companies in the world. When she joined AMD, she already has over 30 years of great experience in oil industry. Patricia’s major project is the development of biofuel, which has already attracted many investors.

 


4. Angela Braly

This woman is the president and CEO of one of the largest insurance companies Wellpoint. She was considered one of the most influential and powerful figures in the health sphere. She is the perfect example of how people may grow in business field.

 


5. Andrea Jung

Initially she is the Chairman and CEO of Avon Products, the company that produces cosmetics. But now she has been invited to the Apple board of directors. You can meet her at Avon headquarters by making one-year ahead appointment or during the board meeting with GE or Apple. 




6. Oprah Winfrey
Oprah is a famous TV host and CEO of Harpo Studios which produces TV shows. She reached the height of her success through hard working and gift of her personality.

 


7. Ellen Kullman 
Before taking top seat as a CEO of DuPont, US based chemical based products and Service Company, she was working in X-ray film division for over 20 years.

 


8. Ginni Rometty

Ginni Rometty is Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of IBM. Ginny Rometty was appointed President and CEO effective January 1, 2012. She became Chairman of the Board of Directors on October 1, 2012. It should be mentioned that she is the first woman to head the company.

 


9. Ursula Burns

Ursula Burns can be a role model to many of us. She came to the Xerox Company as an engineer-mechanic intern but was able to reach much higher goals and has become CEO of Xerox. She is also the first black female CEO in the history of Fortune 500.

 


10. Carol Bartz

Carol is CEO of Yahoo. Before joining Yahoo, she worked for another e-commerce giant “Autodesk”. It was her idea to team up with Microsoft to power up her Yahoo.com searchers.

 