Blinkist Review 2020: Why I Stopped Using The App
blinkist lacks depth
2 min read
I used to be a big fan and supporter of Blinkist. I started using the app in 2015 and was immediately hooked. I was so excited about the app I shared it with everyone.

I also wrote about it several times on my blog. But after using the app several years, I stopped using it. I’ll tell you why, but first, let me tell you why I enjoyed it:

The app helped me to select books to read. Blinkist is not a replacement for books. It’s something different that will never replace a full book. They are honest about that, which I appreciate. If I wanted to read a book, I checked out the summary on Blinkist first. 
Daily insights. I used to use the app every day to learn something new. 
Wide selection of popular books. They pretty much have every popular non-fiction book covered.
Now, here’s why I stopped using the app:

It’s superficial. If you just get started with personal development, I still think it’s nice to use the app. But after a while, I got tired of the ideas that only scratched the surface. I thought that more knowledge was better. But I no longer believe that. After a few years of using Blinkist, I can’t remember anything I learned on their app.
Summaries vary in quality. I noticed this after a few years. Some summaries read like a robot wrote them. I just couldn’t read or listen to them.
It’s popular books only. Like I mentioned above, I like their wide selection of popular books. But their focus seems like on new and popular books only. As I started searching for less popular books, I couldn’t find them.
I joined their partner program in 2016 and helped to spread the word about Blinkist. I also connected with the co-founder and several people on their staff. I intended to provide feedback and be more involved. 

In all these years, they never made a real effort to listen. I don’t mind. But it just shows they stopped innovating. That’s one of the reasons I stopped using their app. After a while, they just did more of the same.

I have a rule that I never recommend anything I don’t use myself. That’s why you see very few links to apps and services on my site. Some bloggers don’t care as long as they can make a few bucks, but that’s not me. That’s I had to share this with you.

And that’s a shame. They have a good platform and an audience of people who are committed to improving themselves. But they rather stay on the surface. That’s not for me.