Changing Idea of Family
Family is the very basic unit of any society. It has universal functions ranging from reproduction to internalization of values and norms. Through families the norms and values of society are transferred from one generation to the other. There are two types of families broadly, one is ` joint family’ and the other is `nuclear family’. Now-a-days, the trend is towards nuclear family due to industrialization and forces of modernization. The role and function of family has gone under transformation. But in India, by and large `joint family’ system operates in most parts of the country.

Joint family has been the common practice though the trend towards `nuclear family’ cannot be ruled out. Joint family is that system in which parents along with their children and children’s children live. Sometimes the relative also live. But in nuclear families only the parents along with their children live. In Joint families grandparents did not feel sense of allofness. The practice of storytelling to grandchildren was common. Children used to learn a lot from stories. Individual shocks and depressions were managed well. Crisis situations in terms of money and other things were adequately taken care of by elders. But the greatest demerit developed in terms of depending. Initiatives were lacking. Youngers could not develop properly. All the time they were dependent on somebody. Individual development got hampered. When faced with crisis situations, individually they could not learn to tackle well. But at the same time joint family provided stability and security to its members.

Industrialisation and forces of modernization gave serious jolt to joint family system. People started moving to urban areas in want of good education and better jobs. Urbanization increased due to industrialisation which provided better opportunities for education as well as jobs. Nuclear families have become the necessity as jobs are the requirement and need of the people. As a result earning members leave the parent house and live where they work with their children. The nature and functions fo nuclear families are different from joint families. The element of initiative and ability to take independent decisions are the hallmark of nuclear families. They are in better position to tackle crisis situations. It helps in professionalism and enhances the prospects for achievement.

In West too the trend is towards nuclear families as the children at very young stage are encouraged to choose their professions and become independent. The need towards achievement and success is greatly found in them. This need can be seen in metropolitan cities with most of the people in India. It has its own problems too. The problem of drug abuse, teenage pregnancies and juvenile delinquency are the immediate consequences of Western type of living. In the absence of proper guidance and direction adolescents fall prey to the negative fallouts of Westernisation and modernization. Sometimes, in the West the idea fo family itself is abandoned. That is why we see increasing tendency towards single men and women. Either they do not marry or marry at late years. In these families the development of children becomes faulty as there is emotional deprivation among children. When the parents work, especially the mother, child gets less of time to stay with their parents. As a result they are deprived of basic development which is very essential at that stage.

But in recent years, the trend is again towards joint families. Though the structure and form is different. Quite often parents and relatives love and stay with their children at working places. The meeting is quite often, though they stay separately. Nowadays the living especially the rent in metros is so expensive that brothers or cousins stay in one house and hence able to feel the togetherness. The link is never broken. People keep coming from villages or distant places. Continuity is maintained which serves both the purpose of need for excellence and a feeling of belongingness. By living in such arrangements it combines good points of both the family systems.

There has been considerable change in idea of family as change is inevitable. More and more people are becoming individualistic and self centered due to greed and consumerist culture but the need for family has been felt at all times. It will be felt and institution of family will continue to be there due to its generic significance. Family teaches love and compassion. Family is the basic unit of education and morality. It is the first and most important learning centre for children. Children are most loved in the family despite their whatsoever bad behavior. Good values can be instilled in the family itself, which is the need of the hour in today’s increasing normlessness and chaotic society. Then only society can become free of rampant social ills. If the institution of family declines, the situation will become still worse and beyond imagination. So the institution of family should be strengthened with all the right inputs in order to live in a more peaceful and humane world.Two Contradictory faces of human nature
“PEACE HATH ITS VICTORIES NO LESS RENOWNED THAN WAR”

Two contradictory forces of human nature-pugnacity and love of peace-have been struggling from times immemorial for supremacy. If was is the natural urge of man and the spontaneous growth of his pugnacious nature then peace is the demand of a social life and pre-requisite of social cohesion. War results in the victor and the vanquished, the triumphant and the defeated, the proud and the humiliated. War brings material benefits and the territorial sovereignty to the victor whereas the defeated loses his liberty, free thinking, traditional way of life, even civilization and culture. Was was considered to be the only alternative to reconcile the two opposing nations and to decide finally the supremacy of the one-ironically enough we can say they justified the truth of the “survival of the fittest”. The possessions of the victor were the source of pride, the position of vantage and the power to exploit the victim. War has always been praised by the war-mongers; war shakes off the sloth which eats upon the motive power behind the national effort. With all the halo of glory war is condemned because it brings in its wake misery, frustration, death, destruction and so many evils which might be found only in Pandora’s Box. Peace creates an atmosphere of love, generosity and kindness. War brings victory and the sense of victory whereas peace imparts spiritual peace and zest to work for one’s progress and the nations’ up life; war feeds the devil in man whereas peace nurses the angel in him; war leads him towards the abyss of destruction whereas peace nurses the angle in him; war leads him towards the abyss of destruction whereas peace takes him to the peaks of glory; peace hath its own victories no less renowned than war.

War, the only weapon of Hitler, the only passion of the great warriors of the past, the only resort of the kings has added to its glories through the centuries, extending from the primitive ages. It spreads, its tentacles in the plans as well as in the thinking of the people who were at the helm of affairs in the different nations and countries. It rooted itself in the psychology of man so as to assume the shape of a natural desire, which craved for expression at intervals. Slavery was the legacy of a war but the only means of satisfying the desire of the exploiters, who worked little and depended mostly upon slaves. As a result of it, war gained popularity because it not only brought wealth, both human and material, it also gave the power to rule the defeated. The victor lived like a parasite rather a blood sucker who fed fat on the hard earned money of the poor vanquished and he showed no decency and observed no codes of conduct, and maintained no reverence for human life and Christian virtues. Every whim of his war carried through, every prejudice of his was respected, every desire of his was taken to be a law, every word of his was gospel truth. What more power can any other action confer than war itself.

The victor builds up the economy of his nation on the ruins of the defeated; all the raw materials are used for producing their own finished goods and similarly they try to snatch away gold as much as it is possible. Their own economy becomes stable and they are in a position to make an all round progress; the defeated lose their initiative and kill their enthusiasm. As a consequence, they are thrown into a state of inactivity and ignorance. Possession of another’s territory help them to get food stuffs and other things which are rare in their own country. That is why many nations cast greedy eyes upon the “Middle East” which has been the arena of war during the last two World Wars. It is only copper and uranium which are found in Congo, in great abundance, and these minerals resulted in a tug of war between the two Power blocs. There is a great possibility that the Chinese had attacked India to possess the Digboi Oil fields in Assam. The material possessions of war, no doubt, cannot be justified on moral grounds and has outlived their justification even according to the codes of social decency, still this has been the order of the past and the present.

War, they say, rejuvenates the stagnant activities, it stirs up the stifled enthusiasm, sharpens the blunt edges of genius, and brings the nations back from the state of hibernation. War, they say, always gives fillip to industries and more development is expected in the case of key industries. The development help the nations to rise in a very short time. The knowledge of atom and rockets can easily be traced back to the Second World War; the efforts to unite the whole of the world and the apparent success in mutual understanding and co-operation are the direct consequences of the bitter experiences of Second World War. The moral blunder which was committed at Hiroshima and Nagasaki has been a consent reminder of the destruction foreboded by a World War. Undoubtedly, the old allies have become new enemies and the enmity has assumed larger proportions. Still war has its own victories and its own strong points.

Peace, with its emphasis upon security of life and security of property, with its insistence upon the moral development and the material benefits, with its struggle for higher and better life has always been the passion of human beings. No denying the fact that peace imparts lethargy and inactivity. It freezes the struggle for evolution, it benumbs the genius of man. Still it cannot be discounted as devoid of victories and triumphs, which differ in their complexion and content, in their implication and impact from victories of war. Peace develops the finer feelings, love for humanity and zest to reform the down-trodden and a passion to ameliorate the conditions of the poor. During peace we try to devote our attention to constructive activities, we weed out the evil customs of the society which corrode it. On its face value it seems to be strange, because idle brain is the devil’s workshop for the benefit of the humanity. During war progress is always on the negative side and it prepares the world for a more disastrous catastrophe, but peace establishes the peaceful atmosphere which tries to kill the devilish tendencies.

Not to speak of peace even the peaceful methods of solving the complicated problems of the world have proved their worth; moral force not only brings a peaceful settlement but also changes the mental makeup and the thinking of those who are concerned. Negotiations can build the atmosphere of peace; even in the conflicting views they find a meeting ground-enemies of yesterday become the allies of today. Moreover, moral force reminds them of certain moral principles which are necessary for man if the wants to live in society. We will have to accept the force of the argument when we are reminded that Gandhiji was able to win over the hearts of the people and shake off the foreign yoke by adopting peaceful methods. No doubt the present day world does not have the atmosphere which is necessary for the free use and application of moral forces, yet we are not to give it up and we are not to condemn it simply because it is unsuitable to the circumstances-the fault lies in us and not in the principle. Successful working of U.N.O. is a pointer towards the fact that not only the common man but even the captains of the States prefer peaceful methods for bringing an end to war. The blockade of Cuba by the Americans made it necessary for Russia to dismantle the missile bases. Is it not a manifestation of leaders’ desire to avoid war and to live peacefully and to settle the complicated problems through peaceful methods? The application of these methods for settling the minor problems is also surprisingly successful. Strikes and lock-outs which are a substitute for direct action, are better than all other methods of settling issues. This method dispels misunderstanding and creates the atmosphere which brings the parties closer. So peaceful methods have their own trophies, more attractive, more permanent and more impressionable.

Peace had its own victories in the past and definitely more glories than the war. It was during the reign of the Queen Elizabeth in England that many of the new islands were discovered, literature touched its glory; it was during the Guptas that we were able to herals Folden age; it was during. Ashoka’s reign that we were able to spread our message of Buddha throughout the world; it is only in the absence of war that we have been able to accumulate knowledge. Peace sharpens intellect, increases our knowledge, betters life, motivates constructive thinking, refines the finer emotions of man. During peace we feel that we have been transported to paradise and feel ourselves moving along with Adam and Eve enjoying all the sweet scents. No doubt we have to give devil its due when we praise war a bit, still devil remains devil and on any day may appear red in tooth and claw, but peace spreads its warmth in the far flung corners and serves as a guide for prosperity.