MOST BEAUTIFUL AND EXPENSIVE HORSES IN THE WORLD. TOP -10
WRITTEN BY LYALYUK ANNA CATEGORY: SPORT
Facebook Twitter  Share

The first place goes to horse Shareef Dancer 
The horse broke the record and its’ worth was $ 40 million. The horse was bought by a group of shareholders who divided the sum. Shareef Dancer was an American-bred Thoroughbred racehorse based in England. Its’ ancestors were real racers and multiple winners of the national championships. 

The runner up is Annihilator horse 
This horse was bought for $19 million. It’s not 40 but still a lot. The horse has gorgeous dark chocolate mane, it is very athletic and develops good speed. And speed is valued among racers. 

Green Monkey horse is the second runner up 
The horse was purchased in 2006 for $16 million. It was bought despite the fact that the horse had never taken part in the competition. Such a huge price was paid because of its genealogy, tree-time champions. 

The fourth place go to Seattle dancer horse 
In 1985 this horse was sold for $13 million. This is thoroughbred English racer, whose ancestor was the winner of several international competitions. 

The fifth place is occupied by Horse Smetanka 
Smetanka (Sour creamy) was sold in 1775 for a record price at that time of 60 000 rubles. The funny name was given on purpose and thanks to the color of the horse. 

Mystic Park takes the sixth place 
This horse was bought by the company “Lana Lobell” in 1982 and at that time they paid 5 million dollars for the horse. 

The seventh place goes to Horse Pine Chip 
It has a huge number of records among trotters. The price that was paid for this horse is $4 million in 2000. 

Horse Sardar occupies the eighth place 
This is a legendary racer. He set a lot of records at the races. Eight records of this horse are still unbroken. It’s price is 3.5 million dollars. 

The ninth place – Horse Silach (Strong) 
This Belgian stallion was sold at a price of $47 000. The owner of this horse is Australian. 

The tenth place belongs to Shire Horse 
This horse is known as the biggest horse because it’ weight was 1524 kg. It had never been placed on a sale, but when being a colt its price was 25 thousand dollars.
