INTERESTING FACTS ABOUT LEFT-HANDED PEOPLE
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
A left-handed person
Facebook Twitter  Share
1. About 10-12% of people on earth are left-handed. Surprisingly, but men are more likely to be lefties. 

2. “Left-Hander’s Day” is celebrated on the 13th of August and it was launched in 1992. On this day lefties raise the awareness of the difficulties left-handed people face every day in a surroundings created for right-handed population. 

3. Left-handedness has been treated differently at different times. It was a mark of the devil, a sign of neurosis, a bad habit and a feature of musical abilities and creativity. 

4. Studies, conducted by the scientists of St. Lawrence University in New York, have shown that there are more left-handed people with greater mental abilities than right-handed. Famous lefties are Benjamin Franklin, Charles Darwin, Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein. 

5. If you are a women over 40 who wants to give birth to a child, your chances to have a left-handed baby increase by 128 times in comparison to a woman in her 20s. 

6. Among the Eskimos, a left-handed person is considered to be a sorcerer. In Morocco left-handed people are called s’ga, which means the devil. In North American Zuni tribe left-handed people are viewed as lucky people. 

7. In many Islamic countries it is forbidden to eat with your left hand, because it is considered unclean. In Saudi Arabia to show your left hand is against the law. 

8. Predominant number of people is right-handed, but as for the animals handedness is equally divided between right and left paws. 

9. Studies have shown that left-handed people are more talented in architecture and mathematics, while right-handed tent to be more talented in the spheres where verbal skills are required. 

10. Interesting, the left-handedness runs in the blood. 

11. Left-handers have quicker connections between the right and the left sides of the brain. This means that all the information is processed and transferred faster than the information in the brain of a right-handed person. 

12. Premature babies are more often left-handed. 

13 Less than one 1% of the earth’s population can equally use both hands. 

14. If a dominant left hand is injured, it’s much easier and faster for a left-hander to learn how to use his right hand. 

15. Right-handed babies turn their heads to the right when placed on their tummies, and left-handed usually turn the head to the left or keep it straight. 

16. Famous lefties are Kafka, Goethe, ????, Prokofiev, Mark Twain, Nietzsche, Beethoven, Mozart, Julius Caesar, Lewis Carroll, Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Alexander the Great, Charlie Chaplin, Henry Ford, Fidel Castro, Bill Gates, Paul McCartney. 


