10 PROFESSIONS THAT GIVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO TRAVEL

Each of us would like to have a job that would open up new and unexplored horizons. We present the list of professions that actually give the opportunity to travel. 

1. Geologist
A geologist is a profession for true romantics who are willing to go to the taiga, mountain, desert, or to the northern expedition. Just be prepared for the fact that a geologist is not only romance and songs with a guitar around the campfire, but the complex and dangerous everyday researches. 

2. Interpreter
Many translators are dreaming to get into a company that will help to travel and to do the favorite job. But, be careful, there are many people who want to receive this job, so you should be able to hit the employer. It’s much better to know several languages. And be prepared to work 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 

3. Animator
Animator is a very creative profession that requires a great deal of talent. For example, the most popular cruise liners such as the Walt Disney Cruise invites animators who are real professionals and who have extensive experience and knowledge of several languages and teacher education. 

4. A writer or a content manager
In order to travel around the world, it’s not necessarily to get a job in a travel publication. You must be a professional in any field. And then you can write articles for your favorite magazine from anywhere in the world. 

5. A teacher of a foreign language
There is always a demand for good teachers, especially teachers of foreign languages. But it should be said that the teachers will have to compete with the teachers-native speakers. Pay attention to the Asian cities that are currently being developed and naturally the citizens of these cities want to learn European languages. 

6. Auditor
The dream of every auditor is a large company with many branches. It should be said that in most cases the auditors are working within their own country, but even travel around the country may give even more than traveling to another country. 

7. Athlete, coach or instructor
Any athlete, who has achieved great results, will be required to travel and participate in competitions. 

8. Circus actor
It is a profession that is not very popular, but it is only chosen by those people who love their work. And it guarantees a huge number of tours. 

9. Model
Model, as we know, does not have to be a girl; the guys also have great opportunities in this business. For prospective models, this work ensures interesting work with various fashion houses that present their collections in various cities around the world. 

10. Volunteer
Volunteer is a person who by his own will works for a roof over his head, and for the food. Volunteers can go to save turtles in the Galapagos Islands or rebuild homes and schools in very poor areas of Africa. 

