BEST BOOKS FOR READING ACCORDING TO NY TIMES

The best book
Facebook Twitter  Share
"The New York Times" has put together a list of the best books that deserve our attention. 

1. "11/22/63" is a novel by the King of horror stories Stephen King who pleased his readers with a great plot of this book. The novel is about the time traveler who attempts to prevent the assassination of John Kennedy which happened on November 22, 1963. This date gave the title to the novel. In the book the author speaks a lot about fate and freedom of choice. It’s a really interesting book that’s worth your attention. 

2. "The Art of Fielding" by American author Chad Harbach. The plot of the story is developed around the student’s baseball team of the small Wisconsin college which is situated on the shores of Michigan. The team reaches incredible success with the new incredibly gifted player. This novel shows a beautiful contrast between the old-fashioned stories about baseball and fresh, original thoughts of the author about talent, ambitions and boundaries between them. Off the field, the novel explores the relationship between pairs of people. 

3. “Swamplandia!” by Karen Russel. This book is the first novel of a talented author with a thrilling plot about a wise and kind girl named Ava, who is trying to save her family. It’s about a thrilling journey through the jungles, through the park of alligators. The book is exciting and interesting, to my mind, it deserves to be number 3 on the list. 

4. "10 000 saints" by Eleanor Henderson. In the novel the author follows a group of friends, lovers, parents and children from 1987 to 2006, through the straight-edge music scene and the beginning of the AIDS epidemic. Eleanor catches something interesting of the dark and apocalyptic qualities of the 80s. 

5. "The Tiger’s Wife” by Tea Obreht. The plot of the novel is based around a young doctor during the war on the Balkans. Obreht was born in Belgrade in 1985 but left it when she was 7. Her story retells her grandfather’s talks. 

6. “Arguably” by Christopher Hitchens. Hitchens is a famous American writer and journalist, who is now desperately struggling with cancer. His book includes more than a hundred essays on a variety of topics from Harry Potter to Afghanistan. 

7. "The boy in the Moon" by Ian Brown. This is the story of the father who wants to understand his extraordinary son. This story is about him and his son, Walker, who was born with a rare genetic mutation that has deprived him of the most rudimentary capacities. 

8. "Malcolm X" by Manning Marable. The main character of the book is an American fighter for the rights of black people; this story is about his life. 

9. ”Thinking, fast and slow” by Daniel Kahneman, psychologist and Nobel laureate. In this book the author shows the irrationality and tries to convince the reader that we overestimate the importance of whatever it is we are thinking about. The book is quite interesting, even for a large audience despite the psychological themes. 

10. "A world on fire" by Amanda Foreman. The plot of the book reveals us the role of Britain in the US Civil War.

Facebook Twitter  Share

 
