HOW TO AVOID JET LAG DURING FLIGHTS?
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: TRAVEL AND RECREATION
A plane flying in the sky
Facebook Twitter  Share
Travelling is great! You can explore the world, see new sights, you can broaden your mind…but jet lag is not the best thing about travelling. How to avoid these unpleasant feelings? Read and use in your trips. 

Why does jet lag happen? 
Every one of us has an internal timing system known as the circadian rhythm. This personal watch is controlled by the hypothalamus, a small area of the human brain. Hypothalamus works in pair with our eyes in order to determine the time when the body needs the hormones. When we fly, the amount of light absorbed by the eyes changes, and this misleads the hypothalamus. As a result sleep hormones are released at the time when they are usually released. 

Symptoms
One of the most common symptoms of jet lag is the feeling that everything happens not in the right time. You are hungry when it’s too early to be hungry, you wake up too early, and you don’t want to go to bed till late at night. Other symptoms are: difficulty with concentrating, irritability, nausea, upset stomach, runny nose, muscle ache, headache, women who travel often have disturbed menstrual cycle. 

Tips to prevent jet lag
Body’s biorhythm failure is devastating for our body, that’s why scientists try to find new ways to prevent jet lag. 

1. Prepare yourself for new time zone
If you know that you have to change time zones, start to prepare your body before you get on board the plane. Go to bed earlier, or, conversely, later, which would make it easier to change time zones. 

2. Go outside more often
Recent studies show that natural light helps to stimulate the production of hormones that keep you awake. 

3. Drink more water
Dehydration is a common side effect. This happens mainly due to changes in air pressure. Dehydration can increase fatigue. It is advised to drink plenty of water before, during and after a flight. 

4. Eat less, but often
Studies show that making five or six smaller meals out of three bigger ones will help your body to adapt quicker. 

5. Don’t drink alcohol and caffeinated drinks
These diuretics will not only reinforce the feeling of dehydration, but also will make the work of the hypothalamus more complicated. 

6. Take a nap
Try to take a nap whenever you feel sleepy. 15 minutes of rest will help your body to cope with the change of time and add energy to the rest of the day. 

7. Be active
Take a walk around the plane, and after check-in, be sure, to have a walk around the town. This will help your body quicker and easier to fall asleep in the evening. 


