Should Cell Phones be allowed in Schools?
 

It is always fun to use new electronic gadgets. The most common among them is a cell phone. Some decades ago it was hard to imagine that we could contact a person while walking on the road, shopping in the market doing exercise in a gymnasium travelling in a bus,  car, train etc. but with the help of cell phones this has become possible now. About ten years back the prices of cell phones were so high that middle class people could not even think of owing them. But now they have become cheap and affordable. Now cell phones are being used by everyone from a businessman to a vegetable vendor. In some families each member has a cell phone. Even school going children are using them. This widespread usage of cell phones by school going children is a matter of concern.

Some state government took a major step and put a ban on the use of cell phones in schools and colleges. It easy felt by them that cell phones helped in the perpetration of certain very unhealthy activities that could have serious scoop psychological consequence. Now a day whether cell phones should be allowed in scallops or lot has become a moot topic.

Generally parents are much concerned about the safety and security of their children. They feel that they should always be able to girt in touch with their children with rear to their general wellbeing instead of merely downing in anxiety and cell phones prove to be the ;best means for them.

It is true that cell phones are a great communication and safety tool. Students can summon help if they get stuck in any emergency situation. Especially the girl students when equipped with cell phone have a better chance of safety. But usage of cell phones has many negative sides also. There have been instances where cell l phones were used to cheat in the examination. Students possessing cell phones may misuse them to distract the class.

Newspapers are full of reports every day about the several disorders an Dysfunctions cause by the cel l phones. Youngsters communicate all kinds of emotions using text messages an the result is a serious distortion of language.  Students get so use to writing in short forms an hence sometimes they are not able to correctly spell even simple words in examination. Cell phones may also be use for defaming, creating pornographic content or organizing criminal activities. Built in digital cameras are also adding a new dimension to the problem. There are cases of students using a cell phone camera to take picture of classmates in personal situations such as in the toilets and is rebutting these pictures via MMS within minutes.

Use of cell phones not only spoils children morally and psychologically but it also causes number of physical problems. Regular use of cell phones may affect the sense of hearing. Doctors have come across a number of youngsters with RSI . studies have found that text messages  regularly, over a long period of time, could cause repetition strain which may cause both short and long terms injuries. When traditional bullying occurs in a schoolteachers are often able to control but cyber bullying is difficult to detect and control.

In spite of having such negative aspects of cell phone use in school we cannot overlook the concern of parents for the security and safety of there children. Their worry and concern can be justified in the lightly of the reports of abduction and other security concerns. But the extent to which children use cell phones outstrips any safety consideration. A balanced approach is needed. Classrooms are meant for study. There is no logic for allowing phones in classrooms. The students must keep their cell phones switched off during study time. The cell phones should be banned during the school hours but may be used outside the school premises. Hence a partial ban would be the right course.