??P-10 MISTAKES WOMEN MAKE WHILE CHOOSING AN OUTFIT

A girl choosing her outfit
Facebook Twitter  Share
Be careful choosing your outfit; especially try not to make mistakes, which are set out below. 

10. Bra straps are constantly falling down
One of the mistakes many women make is bra straps that are constantly falling down. Experts advise to choose strapless bras or those which straps are crossed at the back for open shirts and dresses. 

9. Wrong color of the underwear
Very often women do not hesitate and choose the underwear, and then realize that it is shade-rayed through the dress. In summer, experts say that it is necessary to choose flesh-colored underwear that will not be seen even under the most delicate fabrics dress. Moreover, it should be said that seamless underwear has lots of advantages. 

8. Sandals with socks
This paragraph is also applied to men, because many of them wear sandals with socks, not even thinking about how ridiculous it looks. But it should be said that many women also have such a mistake. 

7. Short pants
This mistake is also made by men and women who are not paying attention to the length of the pants, if the pants are too short they look very comical. Choosing a pair of jeans or pants, remember that you can wear them with high heeled shoes. 

6. Business clothes and sneakers
Never try to mix the things that do not fit together. Business and sports are two different styles. That's why people in business clothes, but in sneakers look ridiculous and absurd. Shoes have been specially designed for business-style. 

5. Visible panty lines under clothes
One of the worst mistakes that stylists talk about is a line of underwear that is visible under clothing. To avoid this mistake, choose, as it was mentioned earlier, seamless underwear in flesh color. 

4. Too tight clothes
Many people also do not pay attention to the fact that their clothes are too tight; that their favorite pair of jeans is small, and T-shirt is short. Do not try wear small things, better buy a couple of new things that will sit on you perfectly and emphasize the charm of your figure. 

3. Underwear that sticks out
Do not wear low-slung jeans, which will allow your underwear to stick out, choose shirts that will cover the top line of pants. 

2. Shorts plus stockings
Shocking option shorts plus stockings will not suit everyone; or rather will suit none of us. Dress and stockings is a classic of the genre, but the combination of shorts and stockings - it's a cacophony of the style. 

1. Too tight pants in the waist
If your pants or jeans are too tight in the waist, this leads to the fact that the hips are beginning to hang down. We recommend buying a pair of jeans sitting perfectly to accentuate your figure. 

Be careful when choosing clothes, because we all know that clothes count for first impressions! 


