WASHINGTON, DC: WHAT TO SEE AND WHERE TO GO?
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: ARTICLES ABOUT WASHINGTON
Washington, DC
Facebook Twitter  Share
The capital of the United States is interesting not only for lovers of politics, because not only governmental buildings but also many modern museums are situated here. Besides, it's a great place for shopping. 

In Washington, like in no other city, you will experience a true "melting" pot, because there are people of all nationalities who live here. 

It should also be said that Washington is not quite typical American city because it has different architecture, the streets and avenues here divide the city in the strict squares, and the most important spot in the panorama of the city is the top of the Capitol. 

What to see? 
It is worth noting that the city of Washington was built according to the architect plan. The plan was designed by Frenchman Pierre Langfang. And at the end it turned out that six out of ten America's finest attractions are located in the city of Washington. 

Of course, all tourists are advised to visit the White House, the Capitol and the Pentagon. It is said that the entrance to the Capitol is free, and the White House and the Pentagon are popular with their excursions. Just note that the secret parts of the building you won’t be able to see. 

Not far from the Capitol the National Mall is situated which represents a park area with the Washington monument, with Lincoln and Jefferson memorials, the Korean War Veterans Memorial, Vietnam Veterans Memorial and the National World War II Memorial. 

Largest museums in the world that are part of the Smithsonian Institution's are situated here: National Museum of American History, National Museum of Natural History, and the National Museum of the American Indian, the National Air and Space Museum, the National Museum of African Art. Each of them is good in its own way, but one of the most popular is the National Air and Space Museum. 

At Mount Vernon the home of the first president of the United States is situated, which gives quite a realistic picture of the life of that time. 

Washington is a city that will impress any tourist. Enjoy its beauty and eccentricity. 
