MONTEREY PENINSULA, CALIFORNIA

Monterey Peninsula, California
Facebook Twitter  Share
Monterey Peninsula is a picturesque place and a long coastline, which is always interested artists, writers and photographers. 

This place is unusually pretty, because the granite cliffs form the bays and cypress forests are home to Monarch butterflies. There are three settlements that are located here; they are Monterey, Pacific Grove and Carmel by the Sea. 

As for attractions, one of them is the Monterey Bay Aquarium. 

It is home to 500 different species of marine animals from the Monterey Bay. Aquarium is connected to the open bay where often swim otters. Here you can see the tuna, turtles, barracudas and other marine animals. Interesting place in the aquarium is the Splash Zone, which is an aquarium-museum for children. 

The town of Pacific Grove was founded in 1889. At that time, it was a religious settlement, which prohibited alcohol, dancing, and even the Sunday papers. Currently, the town is known for its coastal parks with Monarch butterflies. These butterflies can be seen from April to October, it should be also mentioned that the annual return of insects are celebrated in full swing. 

Also it is suggested to visit Point Pinos lighthouse, which was built in 1852 and is the oldest lighthouse in all of California. 

Another interesting town of Carmel by the Sea is known for its interesting design of the houses. In this small town life flows slowly, you will certainly feel it if you come. On Ocean Avenue, you can visit art galleries and shops, where the annual parades and creative contests take place. 

Carmel River State Park is also well-known here. This park is located at the origins of Carmel River and covers an area of about 270 hectares. You can go fishing on the beach in the park, but swimming is strictly prohibited due to dangerous currents and very cold water. Carmel residents love this beach because it is ideal for picnics. 

All tourists should definitely drive along the famous 17-mile highway on the Monterey Peninsula. This is the road with spectacular views of the coastal waves, wildlife and forest Del Monte. 

