YOUR DIET ACCORDING TO YOUR AGE

Nowadays more and more nutritionists and dietitians say that one of the most correct and most efficient nutrition systems is a system based on the age category. 

Your age determines the needs of the organism in certain nutrients. 

25 and younger

Daily nutrient requirement at this period is from 1800 to 2000 calories. As for nutrients, the diet must necessarily include foods rich in calcium, which helps the formation of bone tissue, as well as iron, which is responsible for the proper development of blood cells. 

The youth must start their day with a glass of cool water, and then eat boiled eggs, weak and unsweetened tea or coffee and fruits. 

At lunch you can let yourself to eat white meat, yogurt, and fresh vegetable salad dressed with olive oil. If you eat bread, choose wholemeal bread. 

Dinner, as it is known, should be easy, fish with vegetables, salad or vegetable soup. 

Try to give up sweets, pies, ice cream. For snacking choose bananas, dried fruits and apples. 

From 25 to 45

This is the period of development and it is in this period of life most people tend to gain weight. It is not necessary to limit yourself in selecting products, but there is a need in limitation of their amount in your diet. Naturally, it is necessary to abandon sweets and various additives. 

In this period of life your diet should be contain fatty kinds of fish that are rich in antioxidants, various cereals, and, of course, vegetables. An obligatory condition is drinking enough of pure water, which helps to restrain the appetite and helps to remove toxins. 

For breakfast you can eat a couple of slices of bran bread with a cup of coffee or tea without sugar. For lunch is fish, at least 150 g. You can also eat vegetable salad with boiled lean meat, vegetable soup and natural yoghurt. Dinner must also be easy, choose to eat low-fat cottage cheese, fruits and vegetables. 

45 and older

This period of life is characterized by slowing down the process of metabolism. At this stage of life body needs vitamin C, protein, calcium and zinc. Experts recommend eating seafood, citrus, berries, spinach, nuts, kiwi and mineral water. Do not forget about the lean meat and fish, which is rich in omega-3 fatty acids. 

Our editorial staff wants you to stay in shape, but most importantly, be healthy! 


?. Petrova

