Dances of India
Essay No.01

Dance is a series of movements and steps that match the speed and rhythm of music. It is an artistic accompanied by gestures and expressions which explain the theme contained in the music. One can dance alone or with a partner or in a group. Rhythm and movements are basic to dance.

India has rich cultural tradition. Dance is a part of our rich cultural heritage. It is as varied as the land itself. it has an underlying unity which binds the people of the country to gather. The dances of India are an expression of an ancient civilization.

Dance in India has an unbroken tradition of over 2000 years. Its themes are derived from mythology legends and classical literature. There are two main forms of dances in India. These are folk dance and classical dance. They are not simply them movement of legs and arms but of the whole body.

Most of the classical dances were first conceived and nurtured in the temples. They attained their full stature there. Classical dance forms are based on ancient dance discipline. They have rigid rules of presentation.

Indian classical dances follow the principles and rules laid down by Bharat  Muni n his Natyashastra many ages ago. There are 180 styles of Indian temples. Music dance and drama have been an integral part of Indian religious and secular life.

Of the classical dances of India five are famous all over the world. These are Bharat Natyam, Kathakali , Manipuri, Kathak and Moiniattam of Kerala. The concept of rasa holds the central place in dance. While dancing rasa is conveyed through bhava and abhinaya.

Bharat Natyam has derived its roots from Tamil Nandu. It has developed into an all India form. This dance is associated with lord shiva. Kathakali is a dance form of Kerala. The theme for the dance is drawn either from the Ramayana the Mahabharata the Puranas or the Vedas. Manipuri is a delicate lyrical style of dance of Manipur. It is based on the romance of the divine Krishna and Radha. Kathak is a major classical dance form of North India. This forks dance is revitalized as a result of Mughal influence on Indian culture. Orissa a dance form of Orissa was once practiced as a temple dances. Only dedanses could perform this dance in front of lord jagannath. Today It has developed into an all Indian form.

Folk dance is a traditional dance of the common people of a region. Indian folk dances have relatively greater free play expression of feelings emotions and sentiments than classical forms. The theme is connected with the performer life daily activities and the environment. The theme is also derived from nature in its various moods and seasons. Folk dances imbibe new influence and at the same maintain tradition and continuity.

The classical dances of India are usually spiritual in content whereas the main force behind the folk  dances of India is the celebratory mood. Dances are a form of coherent expression of human feelings .these dances are not only the exclusive art of a particular community but an asset to India cultural heritage.

Both classical and folk dances owe their present popularity to institutions like sangeet natak academy and other training institutes and cultural organizations. Sangeet natak akademi gives financial assistance o f culture institutions. It also aware fellowships to scholars performers a teachers. This is to promotes advanced study an training in different forms of dances and music.

Some western dance forms are also in vogue in India. The young generation has their bent of mind towards these forms. For young people dance is only a bodily expression of joy and happiness. Weston dance forms are very popular in many late night clubs dance bars and pubs which have been opened in cities. However such dance forms cannot claim to be a part of Indian art or culture.

Dance is a highly developed art which needs immense Discipline and years of training. Many people have adopted various forms of dance as their profession and have earned great fame in their chosen field. many dance troupes exhibit this skill in India and abroad and win laurels. We should consider dance as an art and a part of our cultural heritage.

Essay No. 02

 

Indian Dances

 

When man’s soul urges and inner drives are expressed in rhythmic body movements, it is called dance. Man is destined to dance his way to higher and still higher levels of consciousness and evolution. The aesthetic foundations of Indian dances are laid on the rock foundations of spiritual sadhana. Lord Shiva, the Natraj, is said to be originator of dance. He is also the Supreme Dancer. His cosmic dance is very famous. His Tandava reflects his violent nature as a stern judge and upholder of justice and righteousness. He dances, both in sorrow and joy, as the god of rhythm and movement. He performs his Cosmic Tandava dance at the termination of the age.

Indian dances are famous all over the world. They have changed little through all these centuries and the dancers perform their dance recitals according to the traditional precepts enshrined in Bharata’s Natyashasta a There are said to be 180 styles of dancing, and 101 of these are described in the Natyashastra. Many of these dance styles can be seen depicted on the walls and pillars of some of the famous Indian Temples. Music, dance and drama have been an integral part of Indian religion and secular life. Indian dances are not simply a things of legs and limbs but of the whole body and soul. They are highly developed and stylised and so have changed little in technique. They strictly adhere to the principles and rules laid down by Bharat Muni’ s Natyashastra, they along with variegated folk forms, present a panoramic and spectacular view of splendid and continuous dance tradition in India. Their history, sprawling from the pre-historic antiquity down to our own days, makes a fascinating reading. Indian dances, a proud and magnificent heritage of India, are a phenomenon to be enjoyed, seen and to be participated.

Of the classical Indian dances the five are very famous. They are Bharata Natyam, Kathakali, Kathak, Manipuri and Odissi. In the subtle Bharata Natyam, popular in the south India, feeling (bhava), raga (melody) and rhythm (tala) play the most vital role. It is the oldest dance style and is associated with Lord Shiva. It is a solo dance and most complicated to be understood fully by a lay man. Preserved in its prestine glory and unalloyed purity in Tamil Nadu, it enjoys today a very wide currency and popularity. For centuries in medieval India it was performed by Devadasis or handmaids of gods in the exquisite temples of South India.

Bharat Natyarn’s three components—movement, music and mime contribute equally in its performance. Basically it is a solo lasya, that is, tender and erotic dance, generally per-formed by a danseuse and occasionally by a danseur. No doubt it is based on the theme of love, but it is invariably devotional in essence and never sensual. During its performance it evolves like a bud into a blossom gradually through many stages. The final stage is very fine example of pure and abstract dance full of fascinating movements and rhythms accompanied and governed by the scintillating music. It presents a complex pattern of pure dance. The dancer conjures up intricate images of dance and footwork with statusque poses. It concludes with the chanting of a Sloka. In short, no other dance form can surpass Bharata Natyam and a few can equal it in its delicacy, grace, consummation and richness.

Kathakali is fundamentally of epic dimensions. Its universal appeal and popularity is an established fact. Its epic dimensions finally merge into cosmic ones, It is performed in an open air in a temple compound or a village courtyard. The only lighting used is a tall and massive brass lamp fed with coconut oil and set in front of the actors at the centre of the stage. It is accompanied by continuous thundering of the drums. It begins with the invocation of gods and lowering of a curtain held by two men. The themes of the dance are generally from the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, the Puranas or the Vedas. This dance-play continue all through the night. The facial vocabulary plays a very significant role in the portrayal of the subtlest passions with such perfection as transport the spectators to the magic world of myths, legends and fairies. Traditionally, young boys perform female roles. Kathakali costumes are traditional, gorgeous, spectacular, varied, ostentatious, and ornamental.

Kathak is a major classical dance form of North India dance both by men and women. It is well known for its spontaneity, freedom from uniformity and a lot of room for innovations and improvisations. It enjoys a fair amount of individuality and autonomy. A kathak dancer can change his or her sequence of stages to suit individual style and aptitude. Kathak makes a great use of a number of Hindustani musical compositions like Dhrupad, Hori, Dhama, Pad, Bhajan, Thumari, Ghazal, Dadra, etc. It also begins with invocation to gods. There is a rich variety in its repertoire as far as expression of feelings and passions is concerned. In an expressional dance the performer combines mime with music and dance and interprets the song to the accompaniment of soft music of the sarangi or a sitar. The song either in Braj, Hindi or Hindustani may be sacred, secular, devotional or erotic.

Manipur, bordering Burma, is a picturesque Indian state. Its famous dance form is called Manipuri. Rasa-dance which is full of devotional favour, and is performed to the singing of songs and kirtans and to the accompaniment of such musical instruments as khol or mridange (drum), manjira (cymbals) and a bamboo flute. Its liquid beauty, lyrical quality, re-strained but rhythmic swaying, swinging and spinning, coupled with soft vocal and instrumental devotional music, defies description. The text or songs accompanying Manipuri dance are from great saint, lyricists like Jayadeva, Vidyapati, Chandidas or the Bhagavatapuran. The costume of the Manipur dancers is always rich, ornamented and extremely captivating. Odissi, the dance form of Orissa, is the highly inspired, impassioned, ecstatic and sensuous. In medieval times this dance was performed by the Devadasis called Maharis in the temples. Rooted deeply in traditions and rituals, the dance is very old though its name is new. It commences with invocation to gods to the accompaniment of rhythmic vocal syllables blended into drum beats. The chant of the musician, the beat of the drum and the lilting and measured feet movements of the danseuse are so harmonized and produce a fine balance between the danseuse and the dancer, and the spectators are ushered into a fascinating world of mime, music and motifs reflecting sculpture stances. It represents a fine synthesis of Lasya and Tandava styles of Indian classical dances. It is an idiom which transcends all the limits of communication leading to rich aesthetic and spiritual experience.

Indian folk and tribal dances are fine examples of creative creations. They lack stylisation, refinement and artificiality. Folk and tribal dance forms cover various styles and forms originated, developed and maintained by the villagers, farmers, peasants, fishermen, and shepherds, nomads and tribals. These are out and out for pleasure and enjoyment. They are characterized most by their spontaneity, collective impulse and participation, simplicity, freshness and lack of restraint. Their richness, multiplicity diversity and variety is a thing of great wonder and no less admiration. They are at once thoroughly social, religious, ceremonial, seasonal, martial and ritual, always inspired by mythology, legends, religion and primitive instincts.

Essay No. 03

Dances of India

Man’s spiritual urge and inner drive manifested in rhythmic body movement constitute an art form called dance. Thus, rhythm and movements are basic to dance, creation and existence. Men, birds, beasts, plants, and the earth, all are engaged in a ceaseless cosmic dance-recital. Rhythm and movement is life, and its cessation stagnation, decay and death. Dance symbolizes both evolution and involution. Recent researches have revealed that distant galaxies are dancing away from us at an immense speed, some of them at the rate of about 144,000 km per second. Man is destined to dance his way to higher levels of consciousness and evolution till he achieves fullness, fulfillment and perfection.

It is in this background that Indian dances can be best appreciated and understood. The aesthetic foundations of the Indian dances and other art-forms are laid on the rocks of spiritual sadhana and rigorous mental and physical discipline leading to liberation, however, fleeting and momentary in the beginning. In essence, Indian dances are deeply religious in their origin. They do not simply involve legs and limbs, but the whole body and soul.

Indian classical dances are highly developed and stylised and have changed little in their technique, and yet they are innovative. By and large, they strictly adhere to the principles and rules laid down by Bharat Muni in his Natyashastra many ages ago. They, along with no less fascinating and variegated folk-forms, present a panoramic and spectacular view of splendid and continuous dance tradition of the country. Their history, spanning from the prehistoric times to the present, makes a fascinating study and reading. Indian dances, particularly the classical dances, are famous all over the world. There are said to be 180 styles of Indian dancing, and 101 of these are described in the Natyashastra. Most of these dance-styles can be seen depicted on the walls and pillars of some of the famous Indian temples. Music; dance and drama have been integral parts of Indian religion and life.

Of the classical dances, the five very famous ones are:

(i) Bharat Natyam

(ii) Kathakali

(iii) Manipuri

(iv) Kathak

(v) Odissi

Bharat Natyam is popular in south India. Feeling, raga and rhythm play a most crucial role in this dance form. It is the oldest dance-form and is associated with Lord Shiva. It is a solo dance, and most complicated and subtle to be understood and appreciated by a layman. Preserved in its pristine glory and unalloyed purity in Tamil Nadu, it enjoys very wide currency and popularity in India. For centuries in medieval India, it was performed by Devadasis or handmaids of gods in the exquisite temples of south India. The Devadasis were then held in high esteem as repositories of culture and performing arts.

Bharat Natyam’s three components—movement, mime and music—contribute equally in performance and recital. It is also a tender and erotic dance, generally performed by a female dancer and sometimes by a male dancer as well. No doubt it is based on the theme of love, romance and heroism but it is invariably devotional in essence and never sensual. It is equally and evenly divided into nritta (abstract dance) and nritya (expressive dance). It is presented in such a way that it upholds itself in a sequence of stages like a bud bursting into a blossom of unmatched beauty, colour, fascination and splendor. The artist performing Bharat Natyam wears a costume which is both traditional as well as functional. A wide variety of beautiful ornaments are also used.

Kathakali, the traditional story-play of kaleidoscopic Kerala, was evolved and nurtured in temples, just like Bharat Natyam. It is also known as Attakatha (dance-play) and is fundamentally of epic dimensions. Its journey from temples to courts and then to streets, courtyards and public places in Kerala tell its ever-increasing universal appeal and popularity. Kathakali is performed in open air, on a square stage with a tall and massive brass lamp, fed with coconut oil, set in front of the dancers at the centre of the stage. This is the only lighting used. The continuous thundering of the drum called chenda heralds the performance of the Kathakali dance-drama. The theme to be enacted and danced may either be from the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, the Puranas, or the Vedas. It continues all through the night, to the accompaniment of singing, drumming and playing on the large bronze cymbals. Traditionally, young boys perform female roles, but now girls and women also perform female roles. The prospective Kathakali dancers are caught young and initiated ritually in the art at the tender age of 10-12 and made to undergo a rigorous and intensive training and discipline under a skilled guru or master. The costumes are traditional, gorgeous, spectacular, varied, ostentatious, ornamental and yet functional. Eyes play an exceptional role in this style of dance.

Manipuri dances are based on the romance of divine Krishna and Radha. It was Maharaja Jai Singh, also known as Bhagy Chandra, who helped to develop and patronise this dance form. His daughter Princess Bimba-manjari was a dancer par excellence of. this style. It was subsequently formalised, codified and stylised on classical lines by great gurus of the art. The Rasa-dances are always related to Krishna legends and the movements of the neck, the breasts and hips are not allowed in this dance as they are considered vulgar and below the dignity and grandeur of these devotional forms of dance. The text of the accompanying songs is always from great saint-poets like Jayadeva, Vidyapati, Chandidas or from the Bhaguat Purana. The costume is always rich, ornamental and captivating. Rich in emotional content and sentiment of love, Manipuri dances require arduous training and discipline of the artist from a very tender age under the guidance of expert gurus. Truly classical, devotional and religious in spirit, these are performed to the singing of songs and kirtans and to the accompaniment of khol, niridanga, manjira and bamboo flutes. Their liquid beauty, lyrical quality, restrained and rhythmic swaying, swinging and spinning, with hands close to the body, coupled with soft music, lend the performance a uniqueness and divinity which defy description.

Kathak, a major classical dance form of north India, is performed both by men and women. It is well-known for its spontaneity, freedom from uniformity, and has a lot of room for innovation and improvisation. It enjoys a fair amount of individuality and autonomy. A kathak dancer can change his or her sequence of stages to suit individual style and aptitude. Kathak makes a great use of a number of Hindustani musical compositions like Dhrupad, Hori, Dhamal, Pad, Bhajan, Thumri, Ghazal, and Dadra, etc. It may also begin with an invocation of gods. There is a rich variety in repertoire as far as expression of feelings and passions are concerned. In an expressional dance, the artist combines mime with music and dance and interprets the song to the accompaniment of soft music of the sarangi or a sitar. The songs, either in Hindi, Braj or Hindustani, may be sacred, secular, devotional or erotic.

Odissi, the classical dance form of Orissa is highly inspired, impassioned, ecstatic and sensuous. In medieval days, this dance was performed by the Devadasis, called Maharis, in the temples. Rooted deeply in traditions and rituals, the dance is very old though its name is new. It commences with an invocation of gods to the accompaniment of rhythmic vocal syllables blended into drum-beats. The chant of the musician, the beat of the drum and the lilting and measured foot movements of the danseuse are so harmonised as to produce a delicate balance between the danseuse and the dance. The audience is ushered into a fascinating world of mime, music and motifs, reflecting sculpture stances. It represents a fine synthesis of Lasya and Tandaua styles of Indian classical dances. It has an idiom that transcends all the limits of communication, leading to a rich, aesthetic and spiritual experience.

Indian folk dances have relatively far greater free play, expression of feelings, emotions and sentiments than classical forms. The folk people are born dancers. Their gait, movements and various activities, especially those of women, betray their rhythmic tempo and sculpturesque poses and postures. Folk dance-forms are intimately connected with the performer’s life, daily activities, environment and other physical surroundings and nature in its various moods and season. Indian folk dances are ever fresh, fragrant and imbued with a wonderful capacity to renew and to imbibe new influences and yet to maintain tradition and continuity. Indian folk dances are part and parcel of the country’s rich cultural heritage and immense artistic wealth. Their staggering variety and richness inspires wonder and admiration. They are at once thoroughly religious, social, ceremonial, seasonal, material, ritual, romantic and erotic and always inspired by mythology, legends. scriptures, folk tales and, above all, by the most primitive instinct to express pain and pleasure through linear and statuesque stances and rhythmic movements.