Students and Politics

 Essay No. 01

During the days of India’s struggle for independence, the students’ participation in politics deemed synonymous with their involvement in the pious cause of attaining freedom from the British despot. Students imbued with the desire to achieve freedom, threw themselves in hundreds and thousands into the turbulence of revolutionary politics. Their active participation in the struggle for freedom was undoubtedly useful for they posses required zeal and energy and in those peculiar circumstances, they were fully justified in sacrificing their studies at the altar of political freedom.

But with the country became independent, the situation has altogether changes. The participation of students in the polities is required a through reviews. We have to see what do we expect from the students; whether we want them to the become the politicians of tomorrow or we want them to become an administrator, scientist, judge or alike. We should also review the present state of politics in our country and its impact on students.

Students of today are the citizens of tomorrow. The propriety an d necessity of the time requires that they should be well educate and fully equipped to face the challenge of this competitive world. Active participation of student in polities may spoil their career and defeat the very purpose and aim of studentship. Therefore, first of all, the students must make themselves fit, acquire the highest possible education and knowledge before they join the battle of the politics. Student generally proved failure in the political game being played by the veteran politicians, game.

It does not mean that students should keep themselves totally aloof from the political situation of the surrounding. They must discuss and express their views freely without involving themselves in any controversy or activity as much involvement may cost their valuable time and energy. The students must keep themselves abreast to the political problems not only of their own country but also of the world. They must apply their mind to understand the origins of such problems and the solutions thereto.

 

 Essay No. 02

Students and Politics

The question of the participation of students in politics has always evoked a lot of discussion. It has been a very controversial subject. Two contrasting opinions have been expressed by the two groups of people. Both the groups are equally convinced of the merits of their cases. The discussion goes on between the students, teachers, politicians and other well-wishers of the student community. In spite of their best efforts, no satisfactory or convincing solution has so far been found out.

Those who oppose the participation of students in politics put up a strong case. They argue that politics is a dirty game. It creates groups and parties and leads to permanent enmities. It disturbs the peace of mind of the students. The primary duty of a student is to pay single-minded attention to his studies. He is supposed to lead a life of penance or Tapasya. He cannot afford to take part in the luxury of politics. Politics causes a great interference in the studies of the students. Interest in politics leads a student to an active participation in strikes, demonstrations and processions. At times, it brings him into a serious clash with the college authorities or the police. May be, he lands himself in jail. All this disrupts his studies and he is pushed off the rails. He loses his real purpose in life and goes astray. Participation in politics thus spoils a student’s career and makes him useless for any purpose other than strikes, demonstrations and slogan-shouting.

Those who support the participation of students in politics make out an equally strong case. They argue that education does not mean mere literacy. It means a total and all-round development of a student’s personality. It makes him aware of what is happening in his country and in the world around him. It also develops in him the qualities of leadership. Instead of being a timid, shy book-worm, he grows into an aggressive, dominating and alert young man who knows how to fight the battle of life.

Participation in politics trains a student to be a good citizen. It gives him a training in the democratic way of life. He grows into a responsible and cultured citizen who is an asset to the nation It creates in him a sense of patriotism. He knows his duties towards his country. He has a fair knowledge of the world. He develops debating skill and he can always put forward his point of view with force and conviction. He develops all the qualities of head and heart. He is trained for leadership. As a leader in the making, he develops such qualities as courage, sincerity of purpose, a spirit of service, sympathy for the fellowmen, self-discipline and devotion to duty.

Student period is the formative period in one’s life. A student must develop all such qualities in him during this period as enable him to lead a successful life. If we study the lives of our great leaders, we shall find that most of them did take an active part in politics even during their student days.

Now, it is difficult to pronounce any verdict in favour of one or the other point of view. The golden mean would probably be the best way out. A student should take part in politics, but is should not be an active participation. All activities are good if one remains within reasonable limits. Students should, therefore, pay attention to their studies. They should at the same time, keep themselves informed about what is happening around them They should not hesitate from jumping into politics if the situation threatens the unity or the freedom of the country.