WHAT DO YOU NEED TO CHECK BEFORE SELLING A HOUSE?
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
A house in man's hands
Facebook Twitter  Share
Selling a home is a serious process with a long preparation. Especially you need to check several things, which we'll cover in this article, because future buyers will ask you for sure about the work of these systems. 

Mandatory point when selling a home is a dry basement. Each of the buyers will ask you about this important moment. It is worth noting that you should not be scared if you know about the problems in your basement, because, basically, these problems are fairly easy to solve. Sometimes only simple desiccant is enough. 

A house with no hot water - it's not a house that is why the water heater should be in a good condition, no connections should leak. It is said that before selling the house you need to carry out all maintenance work in order to be confident in your devices by 100%.

Another important point is sewage. There is nothing worse than broken or clogged drain. It should be noted that the price of a home can be increased if all the systems in the house are functioning smoothly. 

It’s always worth checking out all the faucets and pipes to the possibility of leakage. After all, this is the thing that housewives pay attention to. Replace all broken and leaking taps, and this problem will not cut off the purchase price. 

Most likely you opened the main electrical panel a long time ago, but before selling the house its work should be tested and checked. Make sure it does not spark, and also remove all the cobwebs and spiders out. If you doubt in your abilities, it is better to invite a professional who will conduct the preventive work and will tell you about the state of electrical system in the house. 

One of the most important points to which you should pay your attention is the heating and ventilation system in the house. It is mandatory to ensure that it works perfectly, as well as maintenance work has been carried out. Air conditioners should not leak and should not be rusty, and the entire heating system should work properly. These systems buyer will necessarily ask you to turn on. 

Good luck in the sale or purchase of your home! 

