Global warming

 

 

The Earth has a natural system of balancing the absorption and release of heat that it absorbs from the sunlight. But, for the last few years, this balance seems to be under severe threat. There has been enormous increase in gases like Carbon dioxide, Methane and Nitrous Oxide etc.

As the temperature rises, there is a rise in sea level; due to melting of glaciers and the ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica. While sea level is expected to rise almost every year but a considerable variation is seen now-3-days. In some regions, the rise in sea level may be almost nil, but other might experience a rise of as much as twice the global average. The predictions are that global warming over the next century might turn out to be much worse than estimated. If the Green House Gas (GHG) emissions are established, which means immediate out of 60-70% emission of carbon dioxide globally, even then the rise of atmospheric temperature would be 1C and rise in sea level would be approximately 1 meter. According to the findings of the intergovernmental Panel on climate Change warming overland could lead to a 60C rise in temperature by2100 that is 20C higher than the earlier estimates.

In 1992, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was adopted. It recognized that industrialized countries were mostly responsible for increased Green House Gasses concentration in the Earth’s atmosphere and should be the first to act against climate change.

In 1997, United Nation’s conference on global warming was held in the ancient Japanese capital of Kyoto for ten days, the climate change meet lay deadlocked as none was ready to take initiative to check the further damage to planet earth. Actually the USA and Europe want that other developing countries like, India, china, should act as per the accord signed at Kyoto, but India, china have their own reasons, as in these countries, industrialization has just began, while developed countries who are actually responsible for the global warming have already reaped the fruit of industrialization. So they must act fast to have some remedial measures.

In a nutshell the global warming has become a grave threat to the ecological balance of the earth. The civilization is moving slowly towards a doomsday. All the national, particularly the most industrialized, developed countries have to be active to take immediate action on the matter, otherwise, the human race shall have to face an unimaginable peril and the day is not too far.