ALL THE BEAUTY AND SPLENDOR OF KAMCHATKA
WRITTEN BY BATISHCHEVA ANNA CATEGORY: TRAVEL AND RECREATION
Facebook Twitter  Share
Kamchatka is one of the most beautiful parts of our planet. Here the Russian morning is born and the night steps out into the world. In August it is fall here and in June it is spring. In this land the fire element peacefully coexists with cold ice. Rich flora and fauna attracts travelers because of its variety and splendor. The Kamchatka Peninsula lies in Russia between the Pacific Ocean to the east and the Sea of Okhotsk to the west. 

Kamchatka is a mysterious and fabulous region which can be very different. 

Here you will discover the excellence of white sparkling volcanoes, misty valleys of geysers, heavenly mountains that conquer us with its power. 

Volcanoes are considered to be the main attraction of the peninsula. Volcanoes appear even on the flag and the emblem of Kamchatka. This is a unique part of the Earth. In the valley of geysers you’ll be able to see a boiling water fountain, incredible colorful slopes that are washed by the warm water. Together with a variety of trees and grasses they create a magical view. 

The valley of geysers is situated 160 kilometers north of Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky. Its total square is 4 square kilometers, but more that 200 hot springs are situated in this area. The soil temperature near geysers is about 70°C. 

There are also dangerous places here, which at first seem harmless, covered with grass places. But under the beautiful cover burning mud is hidden, and not every jack boot will save you from burns. There are also dangerous scraw bogs. Safe places in Kamchatka can be identified by the plant wormwood. This plant grows only on firm solid. Paratunski hot springs are another great place to visit while traveling around Kamchatka.Paratunka is the perfect place for guests of Kamchatka. 

While traveling around Kamchatka you might meet reindeer, brown bears which are called “Haas”, red foxes, sables and wolverines which are found near rivers. You might also meet flying squirrels! There are about 220 species of birds that dwell in Kamchatka. Among them there are such well-known species as puffins, gulls, Swinhoe’s red tailed robin and gyrfalcon. 

This contrast you can find only here! Have a good rest and wonderful journey around Kamchatka!
