
FREEDOM OF CHOICE: PROS AND CONS
WRITTEN BY BATISHCHEVA ANNA CATEGORY: PSYCHOLOGY
Lots of guide signs
Facebook Twitter  Share
Have you ever thought about freedom of choice, does it give us a lot on not? The famous American psychologist Bari Schwartz criticizes this important principle of the Western society. After a number of researches he came to the conclusion that, in fact, the freedom of choice doesn’t make us free, but on the contrary, paralyzes us. Nowadays we can find dozens of different sauces; a lot of clothes of different styles and in different colors, an incredible number of laptops, the choice belongs to us. What if all the goods were the same, so to say faceless, without bright ads and interesting stories? Why do we have so many brands? It’s a very good question, but let’s leave it for a while and start talking about more global issues. We create a person but don’t follow its’ personality. We can change ourselves if we want to. Every morning we get up and have to decide who we want to be today. It’s interesting, but even the question of our personal uniqueness and identity has become a real matter of choice. 

For example, if we think about marriage and family, formerly people got married when they had the opportunity, and had children as soon as they had opportunity either. The only choice at that time was who you would marry to, rather what we do after that. Many even didn’t have the choice whom to marry. Well, now we are free to choose and it all depends on our decision. 

Subsequently, multiple-choice raises two extremely negative effects: 

If there is the possibility for the multiple-choice, a lot of people get lost and are not able to make the decision. Instead of being free the person is paralyzed. This becomes one of the main reasons why people side-step a decision and don’t want to torture themselves by making a choice. Even if the person has made the choice, it is still quite a haunted feeling of dissatisfaction and lost opportunity. Satisfaction after the made decision would have been bigger if the number of choices was smaller. 

With such a variety of spices for your food it’s difficult to make the decision; and if you’ve made the choice, the meal doesn’t taste the way you want to, the given alternative gives you the feeling of dissatisfaction. The result that has been given by the alternative, makes us doubt and regret about the decision we’ve made before. 

Different alternatives do not allow us fully enjoy life and to be satisfied with all that we have. Learn to enjoy small things and small opportunities!
