IDEAL CONDITIONS FOR WORKING AT HOME

We have heard a lot and talked a lot about an increasing number of people who choose to work at home. And for those who work from home, it is important to create truly working conditions. 

Of course, working from home makes it more difficult to stay separated off from difficult family problems, and working moments somehow leak out into your family. Recent studies have proven that the real "barriers".will help to focus on the work at home. 

Consider that you are lucky if you have a separate room that can be used as a home office. But remember that this office should be used only for work. Try to make this room as similar to the office environment as possible. 

But if you don’t have your working place at home, then you need to set up psychological barriers that will also help to separate off from the home environment. 

In addition, you need to choose the most suitable place to work. 

Firstly, you have to work at the window. Research scientists from Northwestern University suggest that the work at the window can increase your daily energy level by 35%, which leads to better health conditions and a better night's sleep. 

Secondly, you need to choose the right color for the walls. Researches conducted at the University of British Columbia show that red walls or red accessories in the room can improve attention to detail. Red color is associated in our brain with danger, and it enhances the body's ability to focus on details. But blue, for example, can improve your creativity. 

Another important thing about working at home is the temperature of your work area. If it is too cold or too hot at your workplace, you will find it difficult to focus on work. As for specific numbers, the Chinese studies show that the average ideal temperature for maximum performance is considered to be the temperature of 70 degrees. 

And the last point, but very important, is the blockage of all irritants, the main of which is considered to be television. In the room you choose to work in there shouldn’t be a TV-set. 
