HOW TO REDUCE FOOD WASTE?
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
Food waste
Facebook Twitter  Share
Reducing the amount of food waste will not only help the environment, but will also help you save money. 

It may seem strange, but statistics show that 40% of all food produced in America, are produced in vain. After reading this line you can immediately think of restaurants and shops, which emit a huge amount of food with expired date. But no need to think about the restaurants, look at your trash can, which is filled every week to the brim. 

What should be done in order to reduce the amount of garbage? 

Plan cautiously
Before going to the grocery store, make a list of required products. It will save you time spent in the store, and will also help not to buy anything extra. When you purchase products, pay attention to the expiration dates; choose those that have the most acceptable time. Cook food from what you have in the fridge, so that fewer products fall into the trash can. 

Do not forget about the old products
When buying a new product, do not forget to use the method of rotation. All that was bought earlier should be eaten before formerly. Put new products in the fridge behind those that should be eaten before. If you add dry-goods, note that on the top must be the ones that should be used primarily. 

Cook extra
You buy a whole package of a product, even if you take just a part of it. What can be done in this situation? Firstly, you can cook more and then freeze extra food. Secondly, you can use the rest of foods during cooking of the side dishes or desserts. Pies, bread, vegetables and fruit - all of these ingredients can be frozen and used as needed. 

Be careful in restaurants
Despite the fact that the restaurants can legally transfer cooked food to social assistance organizations, do not order too much and overpay for discarded products. In many restaurants one serving is enough for two, so do not hesitate and just ask you to bring an additional fork for your partner. 

Good luck with your savings! Let your economy be really economical! 

