LOVE AND BUDGET: HOW TO DIVIDE?
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: RELATIONS
Spouses with money
Facebook Twitter  Share
Any married couple sooner or later faces the joint life problems. That is why the management of the family budget is a serious challenge for any couple. 

The most common problem is that partners have different attitudes to the problem of sharing out the family budget. 

Option 1. Common Cause

Family budget is common, and the money is spent by both partners as needed. This option tells about the trust between partners and helps to make joint decisions. The danger of this option is that one of the partners may begin to use the kindness and trust of the other. You should be careful with the family budget; you should set the framework of the amounts of money that can be spent by each partner. 

Option 2. Part of money are given to the budget 

Another variant of the budget is when partners decide what part of their earnings they will give to the budget. The rest of the earnings each partner can be spent the way he or she wants. Such an option is chosen by many couples because such a system is convenient. With this option, experts still recommend as often as possible to consult with your partner about your own spending. 

Option 3. Everyone holds on to its own

This option gives each partner the opportunity to hold his own income and budget. Partner can give the money to the joint expenses or to pay them in full, providing the other partner the right to manage his own budget at his discretion. This is not an option for many couples, as it makes their relationship vulnerable and full of distrust. 

Option 4. Who is more? 

Differences in salaries that get you and your partner can aggravate your relationship if you do not learn to trust each other. If any of you are used to spending large sums, do not forget to notify the partner about this fact. Be sure to listen to the advice of a partner, as well as learn to limit yourself and live within your means. 

Option 5. Economical economy

If you try to save on everything, for your partner it may look stingy and greedy. Analyze your earnings and the purchasing power. It’s not worth living, constantly folding and putting off for a rainy day. But no one is saying that this should not be done. You just need to find a middle ground and enjoy a family life in which there is no place for quarrels over money. 

