WITH AGE THEY LOOK BETTER…

Facebook Twitter  Share
If you think that these lady killers were attractive in their youth, you may be very wrong. Experts say that with age they look much better, they become sexy and attractive. 

Hugh Jackman, 44
Jackman is a triple threat: he can act, sing and dance. So it is no surprise that he won his first Oscar for the role of Jean Valjean in "Les Miserables." He is also known for his role of the superhero Wolverine in "X-Men: Days of future past." 




Patrick Dempsey, 47
Dempsey, whom people still continue to call McDreamy for his role of the neurosurgeon in "Grey's Anatomy", continues to pluck the heads of young interns and women, while continues to play in the hit show. 

Johnny Depp, 49
Hard to believe that Hollywood's favorite bad boy will be celebrating his 50th anniversary this year. For the film "Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl," Depp received an award from the Academy Award in three categories. So he has something to celebrate. 

George Clooney, 51
Clooney travels a lot around the world with such charities as Enough Project, which is struggling with the genocide in Sudan and Congo, as well as with Not On Our Watch, a humanitarian organization that he co-founded himself. This beloved actor with a bachelor degree still loves to write, direct and star in his films. In 2012, Academy Award nominated his film "The Ides of March".

Denzel Washington, 58
A native of New York City hooked on acting when he was a student at Fordham University in Lincoln Center. Washington's role in the film "Flight" (2012) gave him six nominations from the Academy Award and a third victory. He received an Oscar for her role in "Training Day" and the movie "Glory." 

Colin Firth, 52
The British actor is known for his award-winning role of King George VI in "The King's Speech." In 2012 he also received two awards from the Screen Actors Guild Awards, as well as the Golden Globe prize (all for the same role in "The King's Speech"). He is also known for his comedic roles in "Bridget Jones" and "Love Actually".

Daniel Craig, 44
Craig remained in the spotlight when he nicely played famous James Bond in "Casino Royale." This British actor starred in two more films about the 007. Craig is married to British actress Rachel Weisz. 

Chris Noth, 58
This TV star received the award for his role of Mr. Big in the hit TV show "Sex and the City." His other famous works include "Law & Order: Criminal Intent" and a role in the TV show "The Good Wife".
