Need for Peace and Harmony in India

        People all over the world had though, that with advance in science, in medicine, in education, there would be a peaceful revolution in all the developing countries. It was thought that the big powers, having seen the destructiveness of nuclear and other weapons, would try to resolve their differences in a peaceful manner and whole world would devote its energies to reform and change to provide a better life to the people and specially to the eradication of poverty and economic backwardness. This dream has dimmed considerably. We find that the use of nuclear energy for military is increasing. Those who want to use nuclear energy only for peaceful purposes are going ahead direct. Consequently today there is a crisis not only in our country, but even in the developed and rich countries. Whenever there is any such difficulty, although it hits everyone, it is much worse for poorer or weaker nations. We in India, face a critical situation.

 

The law and order situation in the country is not very happy. There has been communal trouble which many times is the result of deliberate effort to create trouble. Many parties and organizations spread casteism, communalism or other kinds of poison which pollute our society. Similarly if militancy has come to an end in some of the states yet it is still very powerful in states like Punjab. Consequently innocent lives are lost, properties destroyed and ill-will prevails. this type of situation within the country cannot allow political stability and economic betterment. If there is an atmosphere of suspicious distrust, of fear and aggressiveness, it is not possible to think of constructive progress. Only one section of the people should not be taken care of; interests of all the sections must be kept in mind, all the religions should flourish and all the languages should be encouraged. Till every one gets a fair deal people cannot be prosperous and powerful. By fair deal we mean that weaker and the backward should get special help and others should be able to lead a very stable life. If there is peace and harmony only then the nations can go forward. Peace and harmony in the country is sometimes disturbed because of the scarcity of commodities. Sometimes the prices of essential things are so abnormal that it is not possible for the people to remain satisfied. Green Revolution has been able to increase production of foodgrains to a great extent and so people are not so much worried about food. Similarly the government is making every effort to increase the supply of those commodities which are likely to be scarce in the market.

Some times peace in the world becomes the victim of political manipulation. Opposition parties start obstructing rather than helping progress. Correctly speaking the task of opposition should be to build itself and to oppose. So the government has the responsibility to al low the opposition to function properly. But opposition has responsibility to allow the government to function. they start exploiting the situation and creating problems for the government. Instead of fishing in the troubled waters they should try to come out with constructive suggestions. If the opposition parties do not approve of some of the policies of the ruling party they should bring it before the people particularly at the time of elections. This is the democratic and constitutional method.

Peace and harmony demands that we should meet the challenges. There is need of unity and of commitment not to a party, not to a particular person but to the nation as a whole. At this time, it is necessary that we should cultivate national attitude. No doubt the world is moving more towards cooperation and understanding but some of the problems are threatening peace in the world. It was believed that democracy in Pakistan would result in better relation between India and her neighbour. But it seems that Pakistan is still moving towards confrontation; some of the statements of the Prime Minister of Pakistan regarding Kashmir and Siachin lead us to doubt the sincerity of Pakistan in finding a solution to the outstanding problems between the two countries. Similarly other neighbouring countries like Bangladesh, Nepal are not so much favourably disposed towards India. We have a problem of poverty and unemployment which at some or the other stage may threaten even our democracy. So till there is peace and harmony in the country, it is not possible to make India politically strong, economically better off and socially united. There should be peace within the country as well outside the country. So if we want peace and harmony in the country, we will have to see that there is peace and harmony in the world also.