TOYS FOR ADULTS
Facebook Twitter  Share
Adult toys are not only unique, but also differ in price. How much are you ready to pay for them? What is the most expensive toy? We will give you a list of the most interesting and expensive toys in the world. 

A car from Hot Wheels
This toy from the famous series of Hot Wheels is worth 140,000 dollars. It was made in honor of the fortieth anniversary of the brand in 2008. Some parts of this machine are made of white gold and about 2,700 white, blue and black diamonds were used in the decoration with a total weight of 23 carats. 

Toy train from Marklin
The cost of the toy train, which was released in 1906 by Märklin, is 180 thousand dollars. This is not an ordinary toy; the length of the train is 3 meters and the pipe can show real smoke. 

Soldier G.I. Joe
The first soldier from the G.I. Joe series in the uniform of a U.S. Army sergeant was bought by a comic books sales agent Stephen Geppe for 200 thousand dollars in 2003. Initially, they cost about $ 4, and there were four types - infantryman, Marine, Navy officer and a pilot of the Air Force. 

Albert Marquet’s porcelain doll
One of the dolls from the famous in the early 20th century puppeteer Albert Marquet was bought by an anonymous collector for 263,000 dollars. Experts believe that no more than 20 porcelain dolls by this author have lived up to now. 

Barbie doll from "Little Black Dress" series
Barbie doll from an exclusive series of "Little Black Dress" was bought for 302 thousand dollars. The dress of this doll and her diamond necklace were created by Australian jeweler Stefano Canturi. 

Golden rocking horse
Golden rocking horse whose cost is over 1.28 million dollars with its’ weight 30 kg, made of gold was presented to the Japanese imperial family in honor of the birth of his son. 

Teddy Bear in the Louis Vuitton’s style
2.1 million dollars was paid for a teddy bear Teddy, which was produced by the German company Steiff. The set also comes with a woolen sweater and leather pants, a coat and a bag from Louis Vuitton. 

Fowler
The most expensive toy in the world is worth of 6.25 million dollars, the "Fowler", which was created by Christian Bailly, who spent exactly 16 years working 16 hours a day, including weekends and holidays to create this young man dressed in a silk who knows how to play the flute. Birds sitting on his arm and shoulder react at the sound of the flute, and they also begin to sing. Weight of the doll is 55 kg, its’ height is 120 cm. And it’s also worth mentioning that the mechanism of the doll is a fully mechanical. 


