
COMFORT ZONE: HOW TO EXPAND IT?
GY
 The description of Comfort Zone
Facebook Twitter  Share
In fact, what we want and what we strive to be is situated just behind our comfort zone. The main obstacle on the way to success and our dreams is our own comfort zone: areas, thoughts, attitudes and environments in our life that we have become accustomed to. Many people are stuck in the gray daily routine and cling to “status quo”. Don’t allow this happen to you. 

How to expand your comfort zone without hurting yourself? 

Mix things

You need to develop a habit of mixing different things in your life. It seems to be easy and simple, and your curiosity will help you a lot in expanding your comfort zone. 

For example, try to listen to new for you kinds of music. Try to do it at least once a month and after a while you will notice that your music taste and knowledge, together with the comfort zone, are expanded. 

Variegate your nutrition 

Try to cook something new every week using a cookery book that you’ve never used but wanted to. This will not only be a tasty and enjoyable experiment for you, but this little innovation will help you not to get stuck. This is a very easy exercise - try something new! This small act will break up the routine. 

Take small steps

You need to develop the habit of doing everything step by step, little by little. One of the factors to stop us from stepping out of our comfort zone is our fear that in order to achieve something we need to do everything at once. It scares a lot! But in order to achieve the goals you need to take small steps. 

Develop sociability

For example, you don’t want to be awkward and nervous while talking to people. Try to resolve this problem by dividing it into several smaller steps. The first step for you in this case will be friendliness, try to say hello to everybody even to strangers. The second step is to be active while having conversations with friends. These steps will allow you to become more sociable, expand your comfort zone and to become more confident. 

Raise your efficiency

In order to improve your efficiency it will be enough to start with one hour of working time. Try to focus on work, turn off the cellphone, close the door, and get rid of the distractions. In an hour get back to usual working regime. After a week of this experiment try to add one more hour and gradually you will become more efficient. Later this habit may be shown not only at work but also in many other things such as your hobbies. 

Create something new

May be you would like to do something new but fear has always stopped you? May be you wanted to write a book or to open a restaurant? Don’t give up your dreams because of your uncertainty, try to make small steps. Write an e-book and place in the Internet; prepare delicious meals for your family and friends. Take small steps to reach your goal. No doubt this may seem like a difficult and impossible goal to reach, but don’t forget that it only seems so. 

Don’t be afraid to set high goals!!! Don’t be afraid to step out of your comfort zone! Don’t forget that there are no set rules. Your main goal is to be happy with yourself and your life!
