FASHION DISTRICT IN LOS ANGELES

Fashion District in Los Angeles
Facebook Twitter  Share
The official name of the area is Fashion District, but most people call it the Los Angeles Fashion District. 

The best time to visit this district is considered to be the time from 10:00 am to 5:00 pm. 

Los Angeles Fashion District is located on the territory of more than 100 blocks, where over 1000 different stores and warehouses are situated. 

In these shops you will find trendy clothes and accessories at a discount of 30 to 70% off retail price. 

Of course, Saturday is the busiest day for this area. On Saturdays wholesale shops are opened to the public. 

On Sunday, we recommend visiting the Santee Alley, which is located between Olympic and Pico boulevards. Here you will find the lowest prices on the stock goods. 

In the Los Angeles Fashion District you can buy clothes from top designers. A special day for such purchases is the last Friday of the month when you should visit the California Market Center (110 E. 9th) and the New Mart (127 E. 9th). Just remember that most stores do not accept credit cards. 

You should come prepared here: in order to do this you need to visit the website of Los Angeles Fashion District and to learn about all the discounts and promotions. 

A few tips for travelers that we help to enjoy the shopping: 

• The number of toilets in the area is limited. So be sure to visit the restroom as soon as it appears; 

• Pay with cash, it will help you to bargain and get the very best prices. 

If you have already arrived at the Los Angeles Fashion District, do not be lazy and go to the flower market, which is located on Wall Street between 7th and 8th Street. 

If you are looking for jewels, we suggest visiting the jewelry district at 640 S. Hill. 

In order to get to the shopping area, you can take bus lines D and E, which pass through the area. 

If you decide to come by car, be sure to use the parking lot and parking spaces in order to avoid penalties. Many parks are located on the Olympic Boulevard west of Los Angeles Street. 

