EN
HOW TO RECOVER AFTER A WORKOUT
WRITTEN BY LYALYUK ANNA CATEGORY: SPORT
Smiling girl after workout
Facebook Twitter  Share
You finally got up from the sofa and began to workout? It’s great! We need to lead an active way of life and forget about the rest on a couch watching TV. What sports do you go in for? Pilates? Fitness?Or gym? Don’t forget that your body and your muscles need to recover after each workout. 

Proper and wise recovery after systematic training – is a guarantee of good building, recovery and muscle growth. 

Start using split sessions
Try to break your training according to different muscle groups. After split sessions you won’t need a day off to recover after the workout and you won’t feel broken. You toughen the muscles during the training, but don’t overwork your muscles and heart. 

Sleep and rest
When you lead an active life there are unbreakable rules. The body must receive compensation after the trainings. Therefore, 8-hour sleep is obligatory for active people. Lack of proper sleep will lead to breakdown, apathy and loss of work. 

Hot bath – 20-30 minutes. 
But you should keep in mind that it’s not usual bath. The ideal variant is a bath with sea salt. Don’t be lazy, go to the supermarket and buy sea salt. Believe me, after the first bathing you’ll go to the store to buy more. One cup of sea salt is needed for one bath. Hotter bath (be careful with temperature) will help you to improve your metabolic processes within the body and increase blood circulation. Sea salt will ease the muscle pain and remove toxins from your body. 

Massage
Massage is a great way to help your body to regenerate muscle cells, but it should be done immediately after the workout. 

Warm-up
It’s not allowed to start training without warming up. Make it a rule to give extra 10 minutes for your body to warm up. Warming up will help you to widen range of movements, blood flow to the muscles, body temperature and reduce the risk of unwanted injuries. 

Stretching
Stretching is very important after every workout. With the help of stretching you will remove unwanted lactic acid which is released during exercises. And Stretching will become your best friend in the fight with the syndrome called delayed muscle pain. 

Nutrition
After a workout the body is ready to receive the right amount of nutrients, such as carbohydrates and protein. Proper nutrition is a must for an active person. 

Cold bath – 5-10 minutes
Of course, not as pleasant as hot one with the sea salt. But! Cold bath helps to reduce muscle pain, stress and inflammation. Cold water helps with cleaning of the blood vessels, it also activates healing processes. Remember! Temperature of the “cold bath” can’t be lower than 12°C and higher than 15°C. 

Enjoy your workouts with our simple tips!