FABULOUS CAVES IN GLACIERS
WRITTEN BY BATISHCHEVA ANNA CATEGORY: TRAVEL AND RECREATION
Facebook Twitter  Share
No matter how the mankind has been developed, no matter what unique nano constructions have been built – nothing can be compared with the magnificence and might of the nature. Majestic mountains, endless fields, depthless rivers and, of course, caves. They are mysterious as if hiding something great and unknown to us. Sometimes it seems that it’s not us who are looking for the new caves, but caves are looking for someone whom they can tell their stories to. They have seen so many things during hundreds of years and what they have kept silence about. Caves in the glaciers are sleepy observers who wake up when they hear human voice and respond to the steps of a man by melodious notes. Like people caves cannot be the same. They are big and small, almost impassable, deep but certainly adorable in their own way. The caves carefully guard their treasures, but a man, whose courage and persistence could conquer them, opens magnificent stalactites, stalagmites and incredible figures of mineral deposits and ice. Ice caves are very dangerous, but those who have dared to explore and conquer them, fall in love with their beauty and greatness at first sight. There is a great difference between ice and glacial caves. Ice caves are the caves in which ice formation have appeared due to the low temperature or other factors. Glacial caves are completely and entirely consist of ice like ice houses from fairy tales. 

These caves can be found in every corner of the world where there are glaciers that sometimes melt. 

Glaciers are not monolithic, cracks and bumps are formed under the environmental influence along which warm meltwater flows. Gradually the passages become more and more elegant. Caves in the ice can be up to hundreds of meters deep and several hundred meters in length. 

Also inland waters may be found in some glaciers, where water runs out and forms a cave. Very often the floor in ice caves is silicaceous. This happens when the water makes its way under the bottom edge of the glacier, along its bed. Glacial caves are formed in the same way as coves according to a tree diagram. 

On the surface, in the area of the wells, “branches” are developed, meltwater flows along them. Later on branches are gathered into the main trunk, and the exit is situated at the “tongue” of the glacier. 

Caves which were formed by the thermal groundwater look amazing. Hot water, in opposition to cold, continues to melt the ice creating real ice galleries. 

This beauty is easy to find in the Arctic, Greenland, Iceland and Kamchatka. The caves fascinate visitors not only with the fabulous ice but also with the light. Ice is so clear that even through the meters of ice layers sunbeams can shine. Different thickness of the ice and the dust that covers it gives the effect of multivarious illumination. 

Despite of the outward similarity of glacial and karst caves, there are also significant differences. And the main one is the change rate. Karst caves are slow to change, but the glacial ones may change within one season. And in 2-3 years even a large cave vanishes. This happens due to the plasticity of the material the caves are made of or due to the mobility of the glacier. If the ice is static, the cave can exist up to ten years. 

There is a lovely Mount Rainier in the US in which the cave Paradise was discovered. It was found in the beginning of the last century, but by the middle of the century it disappeared. Surprisingly, a new cave was formed again in 1978, it was a large cave: about 13.25 km in length, but in the 90-ies it was closed. 

Everybody expected the reappearance of the cave, but, unfortunately, at the beginning of this century the glacier completely melted. 

The easiest way to find the cave is to follow the water. You’ll easily find the cave where the water flows out of the glacier or on the contrary – where it flows in. People have even tried to use the glacial caves. For example, they wanted to place military bases in the caves and make them undetectable from the air. Such experiments were carried out in Greenland at the Camp Century base. The whole village for 300 people was built during the Cold War. They handled planes that were hidden in the ice. 

But in general, the concept of living in an ice cave is not the best. The average temperature in a cave is about 0°C and the humidity is 99%. Because of the flowing water pieces of ice can fall off from the top of the cave. It should be also mentioned that the entire monolithic ceiling may fall down at any time, or the water stream can break the ceiling. 

That’s why while travelling and enjoying the wilds don’t forget about your personal safety. Successful travelling and vivid memories to you!
