The Role of Computers in Everyday Life
The computer is one of the most brilliant gifts of science. It is an electronic device for strong and analyzing information fed into it for calculating or for controlling machinery automatically. Charles Babbage developed this device first in 1812 followed by George Boole in 1854, Howard and Aitten in 1937, Dr. John Nouchly an J.P Eckert in 1946. These computers were named the first generation equipment. Today with the Artificial Intelligence technology we are using fifth generation computers. Each new generation of computers has been smaller, lighter, speedier and more powerful than the earlier ones. Now notebook sized computers like laptop are fairly common. Computers have been dominating technology since 1970 and have now enter almost all walks of life.

Writing a program is essential for running a computer. This job is done by a software engineer. A  computer program is a complete list of instructions which the computer accepts in order to solve a problem. There are many different languages that can be used to program me a computer. BASIC, COBOL, FORTRAN, C, C++ , JAVA and visual basic are some of them.

Speed accuracy, reliability and integrity are some of the characteristics of a computer. it  can execute over a million instructions per second without committing any mistake. it can carry out calculation in just a few minutes that would require days if carried out manually. It helps us in solving many difficult problems of multiple calculations. The computer has a huge memory. It can hold large amounts of data. The software technology has seen a spurt of development and firms like Microsoft and Infosys have established themselves as market leaders, pioneering the IT revolution world over.

In less than 50 years computer have influenced practically every field of activity. many of the routine activities today are being performed by computers. Use of computers has reduced the paperwork. now most of the work is done directly on computers. The traffic in large cities is controlled by computers. Automation in banks and taxiway stations has provided relief to the publilc an staff alike. Ticketing an reservation have become more efficient an convenient, various types of games like chess an cards can also be played on computers.

The inter connection of computers worldwide, the Internets revolutionizing the concept and the conduct of business . visual and audio access to offices world wide through the network has given rise to virtual offices. One can have easy access to information via the internet. it is an ocean of knowledge for the students. it is a huge library. Students pursuing courses through distance education mode can study the subjects online. The internet is the fastest and cheapest way to take admission in a foreign institution, collect geographical information of any region chat with anybody in any corner of the world or search for a life partner of one choice.

The state governments an the central government have put special emphasis on computer education in India. Computer application is also being extended to legal arena. The supreme court of India has become the first court in the country to provide e-filling of cases.

Computerization has created a lot of jobs for DTP operator, programmers, hardware and software professionals. It provides tremendous openings for new kinds of entrepreneurs.

The computers can be used as typewriters, when equipped with telephone modems, with the help of computer we can chat across the world. Teleconferencing  and video conferencing are also possible. The Internet the puss to keep in touch either our family an friends. One can get information about every subject known to man ranging from government law an services trade fairs, conference market information education and society to politics.

The computer has prove dates f as a friend an servant to science technology and industry. The computer through the internet expands business opportunities. computerization has been done in business, banking, electronic publishing, engineering, creative designing, fashion designing, etc. it is used in railways airlines, defense services, research establishment spots all an communication departments, meteorology, medical science, stock brooking etc. in defense they help radars and in missile and rocket launching. They have opened new avenues of shopping and entertainment.

Telecommunication and satellite imagery are computer based. Computerization can play an important role in rural areas in seed research, crop disease  management and software development funeral industries.

The computer also has its negative side. The technology is misused for committing financial frauds for hacking for giving threats through email for sending  vulgar messages for indulging in anti national activities and even for blackmailing people. chat rooms are used to indulge in indecent discussion. certain websites provide pornographic material which is extremely harmful for young children. To check all such crimes the police have established a separate network of IT experts and developed specialized software to keep track of new breed of educated criminals. But the advantages and importance of computers outweigh the disadvantages. Through computerization the world has become a global village today.