SCI-FI PRODUCTS FROM GOOGLE
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
Facebook Twitter  Share
A car without a driver
Work on this Google Driverless technology has been going on for several years. At this stage the company is negotiating with the authorities for permission to conduct tests. It is worth noting that in August 2012 model of Toyota Prius has been tested, which drove without a driver about 225 thousand kilometers on the roads of Nevada. 




Google Glass
Interesting information glasses which give to the user weather information, information on various individual reminders and messages received. 





Android@Home
The newest technology promises to combine all the devices at the home. At this stage, the technology seems like science fiction, because the developers want the home appliances to their lives themselves. 







Space elevator
It should be noted that in 2011 the company Google X bought this development, which will provide an opportunity to deliver passengers into space by an elevator. Specific dates for the implementation of this program have not been assigned. 




Android Watch
Google tries to keep up with the times, and especially to keep up with the Apple Company. After all, the company already has a similar watch, called the iWatch. Google’s model is promised to be opened for the public early next year. 




Wireless Internet for the whole world
Google plans to provide wireless internet throughout the world. To achieve this, the company plans to fly aerostats the balloons over the regions. With the successful development of this technology Google will be able to provide Internet access to one billion people. 



Google smartphone
Smartphone Google was established on the basis of Motorola - Moto X. It also works on Android operating system. 





Flying machines that produce energy
Google X Company has bought Makani Power Company, which is developing an alternative to the wind generators, producing energy using the so-called special aircraft. 

