20 IMPRESSIVE RAGS-TO-REACHES-STORIES

Facebook Twitter  Share
In the times of constant growing inequality and in the times when economy is improving slowly, it’s difficult to find people who rose from the bottom, it’s hard to find good rags-to-riches stories. Unfortunately, most of the wealthy people were born in wealthy families. 


That’s why we need to know and remember people who were able to rise to the very top in spite of the obstacles and thanks to their hard work, talent and luck. 

1. Maria Das Gracas Silva Foster was able to escape from a Brazilian shantytown and has become the first lady CEO of Petrobras. 

The current CEO of Brazilian oil giant Petrobras spent her childhood in the poor region Morro do Adeus. Her father was an alcoholic and mom worked constantly. In order to make extra money Maria collected waste paper and aluminum cans. Her career has started from the very bottom. She started her carrier with being an intern at Petrobras in 1978. Having overcome all the obstacles and difficulties she became the first woman who took charge of field engineering. Because of her persistence and hard work Maria earned the nickname Caveirao (armored police vehicle that cleans up crime ridden shantytowns). In February she became the first female CEO of this giant company. 

2. Do Won Chang before Forever 21 worked three jobs to make both ends meet. 

Do Won Chang and Jin Sook, his wife, moved to US from Korea in 1981. Cheng had to work three jobs to support his family. He worked as an operator, a janitor and worked in a coffee shop. 

Thanks to his perseverance and faith their first clothing store was opened in 1984, which was able to grow to the size of an entire empire called Forever 21 that currently consists of 480 stores. Annual revenue of the company is about $3 billion. This company has grown to a family business where both of the daughters, Esther and Linda, help to manage the large company. 

3. Harold Simmons grew up in a poor shack with no electricity, but he was able to become a billionaire. 

Multibillionaire Simmons grew up in a small town of Golden, Texas. He lived in a shack, but was able to enter the University of Texas and hereafter was able to graduated from the University with Master’s degree in Economics. 
v Simmons first company was a drugstore, which was almost fully financed with loans. One store became a 100 store network that was sold by Simmons for $50 million and became a real expert in buyouts of the companies. He owns six companies at the moment, including a global manufacturer of titanium Titanium Metal Corporation, the shares of his companies are traded on the New York Stock Exchange. 

4. Zdenek Bakala left communist Czechoslovakia with $50 in a pocket, but currently he is a coal magnate. 

When he was 19 years old in 1980, Bakala left communist country with $50 that he hid in a sandwich. He fled to Lake Tahoe where he began to work as a dishwasher in one of the casinos. 

Bakala was lucky to get an MBA from Dartmouth and a BA from the University of California. 

He went into banking and accidentally started working for a company based back in his native country, opening the first office of Credit Suisse First Boston in Prague after the fall of the Wall. He is a current chairman of the local company with eight manufacturing facilities in central Europe and with a market capitalization of $2.52 billion. 

5. George Soros survived the Nazi occupation in Hungary and become one of the most successful inventors in the world. 

George was able to survive the occupation because his father paid a government official who posed George as his godson. In 1947 he fled the communist Hungary and went to London. He stayed with his relatives, worked hard as a waiter and a railway porter. Eventually he was able to enter London School of Economics. 

After finishing his school, George worked as a salesman in the souvenir shop and wrote letters to the bank directors asking for a job. And he got it. It was the beginning of one of the world’s most successful carriers. Thanks to his brains he successfully won a bet against the sterling in 1992, which helped him to earn over $1 billion. 

6. Guy Laliberte made his bread by eating fire on the streets before opening Cirque du Soleil. 

Born in Canada, Laliberte has started his career with street performances. He played the accordion, walked on stilts and ate fire. But once he decided to take a chance and he didn’t lose. He brought a successful troupe from Quebec to the Arts festival in Los Angeles in 1987. This troupe is well known Cirque du Soleil. 

Nowadays Laliberte is the CEO of the circus that brings him $2.5 billion. 

7. John Paul DeJoria before starting John Paul Mitchell Systems lived in his car. 

DeJoria had rough times from the very beginning of his life. When he was two, his parents divorced. In order to support his family he had to sell Christmas cards and newspapers. When he turned 10, he was sent away to be fostered in Los Angeles. Before joining the military service, he was a member of a gang in Los Angeles. After the military service he tried to work for Radken Laboratories and took a loan of $700 to open John Paul Mitchel Systems. 

His car helped him to spread door-to-door products and be the home for him at the same time. But the quality of the product has brought him success of $900 million a year. 

8. Ursula Burns grew up in a tenement house on Manhattan’s Lower East Side. Currently she runs Xerox. 

Lower East Side before becoming a prestigious region was full of gangs. Ursula Berns was raised by the mom in the residential complex in this area. 

In order to find money for daughter’s Catholic school, Ursula’s mom ironed shirts. After University of New York she came to Xerox as an intern. 

She is currently CEO and chairwoman of Xerox. According to Fortune 500 she became the first African-American woman to lead the company from its list. 

9.Howard Schultz spent his childhood in a public welfare home in Brooklyn. And now he is CEO of Starbucks. 

When it was difficult for Schiultz in childhood he dreamed of the escape from this kind of life. He didn’t want to lead the same life his father, the truck driver, led. In spite of his family to be poor Schultz showed great results in sports which helped him to earn a football scholarship in the University of Northern Michigan. 

He graduated the University with a degree in communications and began to work for Xerox before discovering a small coffee shop called Sturbucks. In fact, Schultz was in love with the coffee and became the head of Sturbucks. Their network started with 60 stores. Right now they have about 16 000 around the world, helping Schultz to earn $1.5 billion. 

10. Li Ka-shing gave up studying at school at the age of 15 years old because he had to work in a plastic factory, but now he is one of the richest people of East Asia. 

His family left mainland China in 1094 and went to Hong Kong. When the boy was 15 years old his father died of tuberculosis. He had to give up studying in order to support his family. In 1950 Lee was able to find the opportunity to start his first company Cheung Kong Industries. From the very beginning the company was engaged in the manufacture of plastic; and later changed the profile to property. Li was able to expand the ownership of many companies and today owns steel production company, ports, airports, hotels, transportation companies, retail stores, satellite TV, cell phones companies and, of course, banks. 

11. Francois Pinault – a man who doesn’t even have full high school education, was able to lead a group of PPR. 

In 1947 Pinault quit school and began to help in the family’s timber trading business and later began to buy smaller companies. Because of the brutal tactics of the business leading he was given the nickname Predator. He cut the number of jobs and sold the business in order to buy it back at a lower price. His personal qualities helped him to start PPR business, the company that sells luxury goods such as Stella McCartney and Gucci. 

Pinault is one of the richest people in France. His fortune is estimated at $13 billion. 

12. Leonardo Del Vecchio was a usual factory worker who grew into eyeglasses empire’s leader. 

Del Vecchio family had five children who couldn’t be raised by their widowed mother. He went to work in a factory that produced molds for auto parts and sunglasses frames where he lost part of his finger. At the age of 23 he was able to open his first shop that grew to the size of the world’s largest medical and sunglasses producer. Luxottica produces such brands as Oakley and Ray-Ban. His company has 6 000 retail shops and his estimated net worth is $11.5 billion. 

13. Kirk Kerkorian started his career as a Royal Air Force pilot but landed as an owner of a huge entertainment complex in Las Vegas. 

Kerkorian learned English on the streets. He had to quit school when he was at the 8-th grade because of the Great Depression. Later he became a pilot for Royal Air Force during World War II. He delivered supplies over the Atlantic; these routes were really dangerous because one in four planes would crash. 

The money he earned helped him to become a real estate magnate in Las Vegas. He bought The Flamingo and has built The International and MGM Grand. 

14. Sheldon Adelson is one of the Las Vegas hotel magnates. 

Adelson grew up in a poor district of Massachusetts. He shared his room with his parents and two brothers. Adelson’s father worked as a taxi driver and his mom had a small knitting store. When he was 12, he started selling newspapers and a several years later ran a vending machine scheme. He tried himself in different areas of business, but his biggest success was a computer trade show. He used this money to buy the Sand Hotel and Casino and later the resort The Venetian. 

15. Ingvar Kamprad was born in a small village in Sweden and became a founder of IKEA. 

Though he grew up on a farm in a village, he always had a knack for business. He bought matches in Stockholm and resold them to his neighbors, later he sold fish, Christmas decorations and pens. 

He was not satisfied by his small business, so he borrowed money from his father and opened a shop, which eventually became well-known IKEA. He was one of the world’s richest men, but recently his net worth has fallen to $3 billion. 

16. Roman Abramovich – an orphan who used an expensive wedding gift and turned it into an oil empire. 

He was 4 when his parents died and he was raised by his grandmother and his uncle. His first breakthrough came from an expensive wedding gift from his parents-in-law. He decided to quit college and start his own business. In 1995 he bout his oil giant Sibneft and continued investing into different projects, including Evras and RusAl. He currently owns the largest private yacht in the world, as well as other impressive stuff, such as Chelsea football club. 

17. Richard Desmond started by living above a garage end ended in creating an empire that publishes Penthouse. 

Desmond’s was raised by his mom, his parents were divorced and they lived above a garage. These times Desmond described himself as very fat and very lonely. He dropped out of school at the age of 14 and decided to become a drummer. He also worked as cloakroom attendant in order to meet both ends meet. His musical talent didn’t make him popular. But he opened a music store that helped to publish his first magazine International Musician and Recording World which later expand to Penthouse and OK! At present he owns a number of publications around the world. His net worth is estimated at $2 billion. 

18. J.K. Rowling lived on a social security benefits before the creation of the legendary Harry Potter. 

J.K. Rowling was born on July 31, 1965 in Melrose Mansion house. While being a girl she played with a boy and a girl by the name of Potter, which became an important word in her future life. She went to a private school of St. Michaels. Since her childhood she adored books; and at the age of 6 she wrote her first story. But it all started when she began to write her new novel about a boy who has found himself to be a wizard and to be in the school of magic. 

Harry Potter brought Rowling global success and $1 billion dollars. 

19. Sam Walton- Wal-Mart founder, before Wal-Mart he milked cows and sold magazines in Oklahoma. 

Walton family lived quite poorly. In order to survive, he helped his family to milk the cows and to delivered milk to the customers. He also delivered newspapers and sold magazine subscriptions. After graduating from the University of Missouri at the age of 26, he became the manager of the store. He used $20,000 load from his father-in-law and bought a Ben Franklin store in Arkansas. He has managed to expand his network and founded Wal-Mart and Sam’s club. He died in 1992 and left his business to his wife and children. 

20. Oprah Winfrey was able to turn her life full of hardship into inspirational empire. 

The first six years of her life Oprah spent with her grandmother wearing dresses made of potato sacks. When she was 13 she ran away from home because of the harassments by two members of her family and a family friend. At the age of 14 she got pregnant and gave birth to a child who died after he was born. She went back to live with her mom, but the woman sent the girl to live with her father in Nashville, Tennessee. 

There she entered into the University and won a beauty contest, was found by the radio station. And from that on we know the story. 

According to Forbes her empire is worth of $2.7 billion.