STRANGE THINGS THAT ATTRACT THIEVES
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
A thief
Facebook Twitter  Share
When times get tough, the criminals do not disdain anything. Nowadays detergents, hay and even teeth are popular among criminals. 

Prolonged economic downturn makes criminals think creatively. Why steal such things as jewelry and luxury cars? 

The good news is that the economy is improving, and maybe people will not commit crime. Experts say that in times of high unemployment the level of material thefts and other crimes is raised. 

What is interesting to the thieves? 

Tide detergent
Tide detergent is called “liquid gold” in the black market, because it can be sold for a good price. Thieves simply load their carts and run out of the stores. 

Last year, the Maryland State Police uncovered a group of criminals who sold the detergent to a nail salon, which in its turn sold it abroad. 

Chicken wings
It is not new to steal wings from Super Bowl. But two workers of the storage in Georgia could steal wings on $65,000. 

Devane Patterson and Renaldo Jackson are accused that they have rented a truck and stole in it 10 pallets of frozen Tyson wings. 

One 5-pound bag of frozen Tyson wings is sold for about $12.50. 

Human hair
One Chicago beauty supply store lost human hair in the amount of $230,000. 

Three criminals disabled the signaling system at the store and crawled on the floor to avoid motion detection. The shop owner is sure that the thieves will try to sell hair directly to the beauty salons. 

Gold teeth
Police of Colorado received a call from a pawnshop last year. The owner of the store told that the man tried to sell too many gold teeth. It soon became clear that the man was a local embalmer, who had already sold many teeth to different shops. 

A local criminal was sentenced to two years probation and 60 hours of community service. 

Hay
Last summer’s dry resulted in a decrease of hay supply across the country, which led to the thefts of hay. Farmers reported that entire trailers full of bales of hay disappeared. One bale can be sold for as much as $200. 

In one town in Oklahoma State the situation with hay stealing became so miserable that the local sheriff put a device equipped with GPS navigation into one of the bales and began to wait for the thieves. He managed to catch the criminals and to punish them to the fullest extent of the law. 

Driveway
Paving stones which are used in the driveways turn out to be expensive. One can may a goo profit on the black market. 

These types of thefts are also popular in England. Many of driveways are made of old stones which is highly valued. 

Maple syrup
Real maple syrup is highly valued. Last year thieves in Quebec planned a huge robbery. About 2.7 million pounds of maple syrup had been stolen from the warehouse, in the amount of $ 30 million. 

Authorities arrested three robbers in December of last year and were able to return most of the stolen supply. 

Cloth napkins
A well-known chef Jamie Oliver says that thousands of linen napkins are stolen from his restaurants every month. 

Although these types of thefts are not considered to be serious, because people take these napkins as souvenirs, they sell them on eBay or Twitter. 

Tailgates
Expensive tailgates of trucks are in great demand on the black market. In Illinois police regularly receives requests to find tailgates that were stolen. In Texas a woman found a stolen tailgate of her truck on Craigslist and bought it back for $350. Later police found dozens of the tailgates at this seller. 

