DUBAI MIRACLE GARDEN

Dubai Miracle Garden
Facebook Twitter  Share
No, it's not a mirage in the desert. This is really a huge colorful flower garden, which was artificially created to attract tourists from around the world. 

The newest attraction in the region contains 45 million flowers which form different sculptures and model. The organizers hope that the garden will become one of the main attractions of the metropolis. 

The blooming season in Dubai lasts from mid-October till mid-May. Right now, the daytime temperature reaches 70-80 degrees Fahrenheit, and at night drops to 50 degrees, so the flowers do not require additional watering. 

At the same time, new eco-friendly irrigation systems are used in the garden, as well as special materials which help to efficiently water the plants. 

The park was opened on February, 14, St. Valentine’s Day. More than 400 people worked on the creation of this beauty during 60 days. The project cost is estimated at $11 million. 

There are about 30 different types of flowers that are represented in the park, including petunias, geraniums and marigolds. Visitors can walk under floral arches; take pictures near flower pyramids and different sculptures. 

One of the main disadvantages on this point is the fact that park is difficult to find, its location is not the best. The park is so new, that visitors have to show taxi drivers on the map where it is situated. 

It is planned that in the hottest season the park will be closed, which will allow the organizers to rebuild and improve it for the next season. 

The second phase of work over the park is scheduled on this summer. Organizers want to add a butterfly garden, shopping area and “edible plants dome”, where everyone will be able to pick fruits for themselves. 

Organizers hope the garden in Dubai will get into the Guinness Book of Records, because the garden has the world's largest flower clock, flower pyramids and the longest wall of flowers. 

Entrance to the park is about $ 5.50 for adults. Children up to 3 years old can visit the park for free. 

It is expected that next year the park will visit more than one million visitors. 




