HOW TO BECOME AN EARLY RISER
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
An owl and a lark
Facebook Twitter  Share
Some of us are ready to get up at the crack of dawn, while others, on the contrary, can’t open their eyes at midday. But each of us knows that the productivity of a person is higher in the morning. That’s why we give you some practical advice how to transform from an owl into the Lark. 

Shorten your workday
If you want to wake up earlier, you should put aside all the things that you have planned for the evening. Cut your working day for an hour and give this hour to rest. Do not take on more than you can perform. 

Stock your body with protein
Each of us knows that breakfast is the most important meal. In addition, if you are trying to be adjusted to the early mornings, then a cup of coffee will not help you. In order to wake up your body you need a healthy breakfast. Your breakfast should consist of protein, fruits and vegetables of different colors, as well as whole grains. 

Reward yourself
Praise yourself if you got up early, and didn’t turn off the alarm and went to bed again. Treat yourself, read your favorite newspaper, turn on the music and enjoy your favorite rhythms, meditate, do something what you enjoy. 

Encourage yourself
Encourage yourself. Don’t think about the things you must do, think about the results you will achieve. 

Do morning exercises at sunrise 
Early morning exercise will increase your energy. After early training, you will feel at the height due to elevated level of adrenaline. Studies have also shown that exercise before breakfast burns more calories and fat and result in a substantial loss of weight than the same exercises, but after the breakfast. 

Invite light into the apartment
Open all the curtains and windows in the morning. Our brain is sensitive to light and temperature, that is why we do not sleep after a certain time. Put your bed closer to the window so you can wake up with the first rays of the sun. 

Turn of everything
Try not to listen to loud music or television in the evenings in order to create a lulling atmosphere. It's hard to do if your house is full of bright light in the evening, and there is loud sound of the radio or TV. 

