HOW TO STRENGTHEN YOUR NAILS AT HOME?
A lady strengthening her nails
Facebook Twitter  Share
Attractive and soft hands have always been the standard of grooming. What to do to get your hands look even more well-cared? The answer is simple - the well-cared and strong nails. 

How can we strengthen our nails at home? 

1. Use a nourishing hand cream
Experts insist that the hand cream should be applied after each hand washing. This will help to keep the beauty and youthfulness of the skin of hands even longer. Be sure always and everywhere to carry a tube of cream and use it as often as possible. 

2. All the housework should be done in gloves 
It should be said that modern detergents are ruthless to the skin of the hands that is why experts and doctors say that contacts with such cleaners and detergents should be kept to a minimum. 

3. Use daily oil for cuticle 
Perfectly suited are oils with a high content of vitamin E, almond oil, rice bran oil or jojoba oil. Rub the oil as often as you like. This procedure ensures that the nails instantly become well-cared and strengthened thanks to the vitamins that are contained in the oils. 

4. Do not use scissors
If you suffer from the problem of separation of nail plate, we advise you not to use scissors to cut the nails. Experts on manicure advise to file nails starting from the edge to the middle of the nail plate. 

5. Choose the right nail file
It is said that for the natural nails is suitable a nail file with abrasive at least 240 units on a wooden or plastic base. Other nail files can greatly injure the nail plate, so forget about them once and forever. 

6. Apply the nail polish on the previously applied basis
The basis protects the nail plate and also protects the nail from yellowing. Be sure to study the composition of the foundations under the nail, it is desirable that they include as many vitamins as possible. If you are faced with the problem of yellow nail plate, then bleaching polishes may help you, as well as the bath with the addition of lemon juice and soda. 

7. If you do not use nail polish, 
experts still advise to apply the special nail polish treatment that helps to strengthen your nails, which will also protect the nail plate from the negative factors of the environment, from breaking, and also from the bundle. 

