HOW TO HAVE A GOOD JOB INTERVIEW?

A girl at the job interview
Facebook Twitter  Share
Each job-seeker knows that he has not much time to make a positive impression during the interview. At the average, the interview takes 10-15 minutes. So what should you do to make a positive impression on a future employer in such a short time? Here are some tips: 

Be for the interview on time
Try to come to the interview earlier, e.g. half an hour earlier. This time will help you to stay camp if you suddenly get into a traffic jam. 

If you come early, use your free time wisely. Go over your resume, go to the bathroom, and consider the answers to standard questions. Make sure that your phone is switched off. Come into the office for five minutes before the interview in order to show that you are punctual. 

Prepare more additional documents 
Do not come to the interview with empty hands. Bring a few extra copies of resumes, references from previous employers. 

You should also have a notebook and a pen for the interview. We recommend to take key points about the job, position and the company. 

Contact is important 
Small talk before the interview is the best way to set a direct contact with future employer. Say a few words about the weather or traffic, avoid sensitive topics and stupid jokes. 

Take stock of the situation 
While sitting in the room try to take stock of the situation. Photos, certificates, memos which are hanging on the walls may say a lot about the future employer. You can, by chance, say, for example, that you also graduated from the same University. 

Take your time 
Like most candidates, you will be nervous, at least inside. One result of the burst of adrenaline can be accelerated speech resulting in mixed and confused words. 

Think first then speak. Try to maintain a natural tone. 

Control your body language 
Body language plays an important role. There are some body movements that can show that you are nervous, and at the same time can irritate a manager. Try to avoid them. 

During the interview try to sit in a pose that gives you confidence. Look into person’s eyes while answering the questions. Do not exaggerate your gestures, because they can look very ridiculous. 


