CONFLICT PHRASES

Two arguing men
Facebook Twitter  Share
Very often unknowingly people use phrases that engender a conflict, such phrases were called conflictogenic. In order for us to maintain a comfortable and peaceful atmosphere at home and at work, psychologists recommend reading them; try to replace these statements with more neutral. 

"I'm busy," "I have no time for a conversation"
These answers will not only engender a conflict, but also will present you as an uneducated person. In order to avoid conflicts you should answer in such a way: “I’m sorry, but unfortunately I’m in a hurry for a meeting, let’s call each other and discuss your problem some other time,” or “ Let’s get back to this issue in an hour, I’m just finishing work.” 

“I’m not paid for this”, “It’s not my responsibility” 
These are the most famous excuses in the world. But in 99% of the cases they show your indifference to your boss and cause only irritation. That’s why your answer should be: “I have lots to do today. What should I do first?” 

"Maybe it sounds silly but..." 
Such a beginning of the sentence will cast doubt on the validity of any further information. It’s better to get rid of the habit to use this sentence. 

"Please, no hard feelings, but…” 
Such a phrase is perceived as a warning about all the following information. In such a way, you unconsciously prepare your conversation partner for something hurtful. If you feel that you are about to pronounce this phrase, try to change the subject. 

“You’ve lost weight!” or “You’ve gained weight!” 
This topic is very sensitive for many people. Most people accept changes with difficulties, and such phrases can spoil their mood and engender a conflict. Instead of these statements, it’s much better to say: “You look gorgeous!” 

"You look great at your age"
With this phrase you remind your conversation partner about his/her age. And many people interpret the words as “If you are compared with other people your age you look pretty decently.” It’s much better to say: “You look amazing!” 

"I’m glad you got rid of him" or “You were too good for her” 
Even if you try in such a way to comfort your conversation partner after a severe quarrel or after a breakup, these phrases could be regarded as an evidence of the inability to understand people’s taste. Just don’t use them. You’d better say: “He/She has lost a lot!” 

"You are as always"
With this phrase you label people. This phrase should be replaced by a phrase “I’m upset because you haven’t washed the dishes again. What can we do in order not to have these mistakes again?” 

"If only you loved me..." 
Pronouncing these words you are not only manipulating your partner and his feelings but also show him that you don’t like hi attitude towards you. This is not the best way for resolving a conflict and creating a strong connection between the partners. You’d better say: “I would feel much better if we could…” After all, the best way to save the relationship is to explain your feelings to your partner