MOST “GREEN” BUILDINGS IN THE WORLD
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
Facebook Twitter  Share
EMPORIS Company has named 5 the most brilliant examples of eco-architecture. These buildings are masterpieces of landscape architecture. 

1. Acros Fukuoka 
This building is the most senior representative of eco-architecture, which was built 19 years ago. The north side of the building has a modern design and the south, on the contrary, is wallowed in greenery and is in harmony with the located near park. This building is a symbol of the city of Fukuoka. 

Name: Acros Fukuoka
City, country: Fukuoka, Japan
Year of construction: 1995
Architect: Emilio Ambasz; Nihon Sekkei, Inc. 

2. Bosco Verticale 
Bosco Verticale (Vertical Forest) really looks like a forest, as trees grow on every floor. All the plants are irrigated by modern irrigation system, which is built into the facade of the building. 

Name: Bosco Verticale
City, country: Milan, Italy
Year of construction: 2013
Architect: Boeri Studio

3. ?ommerzbank Tower 
Nine spiral gardens wrap this building. The area of each garden is 450 square meters. Three of the gardens are situated on the south, three on the east and three on the west side of the building, and are devoted to various parts of Asia, the Mediterranean and North America. Each of the gardens has the plants that are characteristic of these regions. 

Name: Commerzbank Tower
City, country: Frankfurkt, Germany
Year of construction: 1997
Architect: Foster + Partners

4. Musée du Quai Branly 

The facade of the building is a single huge green carpet. Eco-building has a complex irrigation system with various perforated tubes that cover an entire wall of the building. 

Name: Musée du Quai Branly
City, country: Paris, France
Year of construction: 2006
Architect: Ateliers Jean Nouvel; Fassade: Patrick Blanc

5. Solaris 

Green area of the 15-storey office building is more than 8 thousand square meters. It should also be said that the building is only a small part of the eco-quarter, which was built in the city. All the buildings here are made with the eco-architectural requirements, and all are in tune with each other. 

Name: Solaris
City, Country: Singapore
Year of construction: 2010
Architect: T.R. Hamzah & Yeang



