OUTSTANDING FIRST LADIES

Facebook Twitter  Share
Here is the list of the most influential first ladies who have played a great role in the life of their husbands. Be inspired and inspire your beloved!




Michelle Obama, the U.S.

Wife of the 44th president of America, Barack Obama, Michelle, is the most influential first lady of the world, according to Forbes. She has played a very important role during the presidential campaign. Michelle Obama is a fighter for a healthy living; she promotes consuming of vegetables and going in for sports.

 

 

Valérie Trierweiler, France

Law wife of French President Francois Hollande,Trierweiler Valerie, is a successful journalist and mother of three children. They met with the future president in 2008. Long time couple hid their relationship, but during the campaign the woman played a significant role.

 

 

Mehriban Aliyeva, Azerbaijan

Mrs. Aliyeva became the wife of the future president of Azerbaijan, Ilham Aliyev, when she was a student at Medical University, which she graduated with honors. This woman knows how to do everything at once. She is a mother of two children and a Goodwill Ambassador for the UN and UNESCO, and she is also a president of the Heydar Aliyev Foundation.

 

 

Mozah bint Nasser Al Missned, Qatar

Qatari leader Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani has three wives. But only one of them accompanies her husband during the important political events. Beautiful wife of Sheikh is the first beauty of the state. First Lady of Qatar can look dazzling in closed national dresses and headwear. 

Sheikha Mozah is an insanely attractive woman; she is also a very educated woman. The future first lady studied at Qatar University, and then had internship in the United States. Mozah is not just one of the wives of Sheikh; it is a prominent political and public figure.

 

 

Peng Liyuan, China

Xi Jinping's wife is a very unusual person; she can combine public responsibilities and a career in show business. No concert in China goes without the participation of the First Lady! The first lady is a fashion icon in China, which is copied by many Chinese women. Usually she chooses classic style in the clothes. 


