LIP SHAPE AND HER PERSONALITY

Beautiful lips of a young lady
Facebook Twitter  Share
No wonder they say that a woman is a mystery. Of course, because with the help of make-up, hairstyle and cloth they can be changed beyond recognition! 

But her personality can be identified by her face features, especially by lip shape. Her lips speak volumes about her personality and the way she portrays herself. 

1. She has full lips 
These girls are venturesome personalities. Such women always try to get everything that they desire beginning with a lipstick and finishing with a man she has liked. These girls can always find all the best at the lowest prices and you need to have the talent for this. They will not wait for success to come, they will meet it halfway. The girls with full lips are funny, flighty, free and independent. Her man should be a strong person who is confident and decisive but at the same time she wants him to be gentle and caring. 

2. She has full but not big lips 
These women obey their own emotions; they are bright personalities with a romantic soul. She is the one who will comfort and help at any time. These girls are good friends for the girls and for the boys. Men describe such girls as nice Nellies, who listen to every their word, but I should say all for naught. 

3. Her upper lip is bigger than the lower one 
Such girls are commanders. She knows what she wants and knows how to show it. They achieve their goals easily; she has inflated self-concept and full of self-exaltation. She has good carrier but in relationships she shows herself as a cold and strict person. 

4. Her lower lip is bigger than the upper one 
These girls stand out of the crowd. They do not have bright appearance but they know how to present themselves. This is also applied to her pace. These girls value their own personality and their talents. They are playful, simple on the outside and mysterious in the inside. They are also capricious. She can be a mistress or a child; and she chooses a special man with strong character qualities. 

5. She has thin and wide lips 
She is a very realistic person. Such girls really dream and act emotionally. They do not feel sorry, and they look unapproachable and cold. But in fact, she has a warm and vulnerable heart. That’s why she tries to be cold, in order not to feel pain. She will open herself to a man who will be able protect her from the “monsters” in this wonderland. 

6. She has small, thin lips 
These are real optimists, who do not have such word as “a bad day”. They are always willing to search for an adventure and fun. But they have strong and decisive character. She’ll open herself to a man who will be made of the same clay, who will love the same things she adores. 

It goes without saying that it will be easier and simpler to live noticing these small things, because our universe is formed out of such small pieces.