TOP 10 FREE ATTRACTIONS OF PARIS
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: TRAVEL AND RECREATION
Facebook Twitter  Share
City of love, the capital of fashion, and a literary paradise ... Paris has many different faces. Paris is an expensive city, but it can also open up from the other captivating beauty.

1. Cathédrale de Notre Dame de Paris 
Decorated with statues and gargoyles in the Gothic style, this impressive symbol of Paris is of great importance for every visitor. You can enter this magnificent medieval building is free of charge, but if you hate standing in long lines, take a walk along the Seine and you can enjoy an alternative view of the Cathedral’s famous peaks. 




2. Le Champ de Mars 
The lift to the top of the Eiffel Tower can cost €13.40 per ticket, but, fortunately, the view from the bottom is also stunning. Le Champ de Mars is a well-kept park with numerous lawns and flowerbeds. Bring a blanket, wine and cheese brie and wait for the best light show when the Eiffel Tower is filled with light. 




3. Père Lachaise Cemetery 
The most frequently visited place in Paris where you can communicate with the great literary figures such as Proust, Balzac, Oscar Wilde and others. Jim Morrison is also buried here, his grave is spangled with cigarettes and garlands of flowers as well as alcoholic offerings from rock fans who organize musical pilgrimage here. 

4. Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris 
Immerse yourself in the surreal world of Paris. Here you are sure to meet Cubist Braque and dancers of Matisse. There is sure to be something to see. 

5. Marché d’Aligre
Enjoy the best local products at Marché d'Aligre. Mountains of cheese, handicrafts, meat and flower shops. Stop and get your famous French baguette. 

6. Parc des Buttes-Chaumont 
The steepest park in Paris. Go through it is a mockery for your feet, but a feast for your senses. The abundance of birds, rocky scenery and even a waterfall will make your day and distract you from the bustle of the French capital. 

7. Canal St-Martin
Join mannered Parisians at the water edge and threw rocks into the water, as Amelie. It’s a perfect place to have a picnic, uncork a bottle of wine and listen to the locals’ talks. 

8. Rue Mouffetard 
This cobbled market is very famous, visit it and you will realize why. Treat yourself to an ice cream in the shape of roses from Gelati d’Alberto at 45 rue Mouffetard. 

9. La Promenade Plantée 
It offers a truly stunning view, and allows you to stealthily pass through lush green arch in order to escape from the crowds. This charming 4.5 km route goes through the 12th district of Paris. 

10. Jardin des Tuileries 
Add your journey to Paris royal perception and stroll through the historic park, located between the Louvre and Concorde. Follow the footsteps of Marie-Antoinette and see where Napoleon built his triumphal arch. 

