SPRING AVITAMINOSIS: CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES, VITAMINS

The sun is shining, flowers blossom, temperatures are rising and nature awakens from winter sleep. Spring is a beautiful time, isn’t it? 

Along with positive changes, it’s also the time when our body lacks vitamins, that is so-called avitaminosis.

Winter colds and small amounts of sunshine make feel us weak. The stores of vitamins in the body are significantly reduced during the winter. Weather shifts can affect immunity. As a result, a lot of people feel unwell with the start of spring.

spring avitaminosis

Usually, vitamin deficiency can be caused by:
? Flu, cold, similar winter diseases, etc.;

? Too much stress, not enough rest, insomnia, exhausting work conditions, etc.;

? Lack of vitamins from fruits and vegetables that have been stored for a long time;

? Bad habits (smoking and alcohol abuse).

  spring avitaminosis            
   SYMPTOMS 
Treatment of vitamin deficiency is a necessity, otherwise, it can lead to serious consequences for health.  These and other symptoms of spring avitaminosis can affect your health and appearance. If you’ve noticed one of below in yourself, you should see your doctor to get recommendations.

-fatigue
-apathy 
-depression
-asthenia 
-absent-mindedness
-insomnia
-problems with nails
-hair loss
-pale or yellowish skin (other skin problems)

The symptoms of lack of vitamin depend on the particular type of vitamin. Avitaminosis can lead to serious consequences and problems with health.  
• Vitamin A deficiency can lead to severe health complications, skin diseases, hair loss, and visual problems.

• Deficiency of B vitamins leads to metabolic and neurological disorders and other serious diseases, such as anemia. 

• Vitamin C deficiency affects the immunity, causes the bleeding, exhaustion, pain in the limbs and increases the risk of serious diseases.

• Deficiency of vitamin D causes chronic pain, soft bones, rickets in children, mood changes and it affects the overall health.

• The lack of vitamin E leads to muscle weakness, nervous and hormonal disorders, increases the risk of cardiovascular diseases.

• Deficiency of vitamin K causes bleeding problems, etc.

spring avitaminosis

   3 main steps how to avoid avitaminosis:
1 Feed your immune system well. Make sure you eat a balanced diet and healthy food. Pay attention to the foods that you eat and choose a healthy diet. It should include a variety of foods rich in vitamins.   

2 Vitamins: take vitamin complexes (including synthetic vitamins)

3 Do some sport: regular exercise stimulates the immune system by improving blood circulation, concentration. emotional wellbeing.  

spring avitaminosis               

          10 ESSENTIAL VITAMINS 
It’s no secret that vitamins and minerals are necessary for normal functioning of all organs and body systems. Here is the list of 10 essential vitamins and macro minerals that our body needs 100% :

VITAMINS                         BENEFITS                              FOODS
Vitamin  D	 It helps to absorb calcium in the body promoting strong healthy bones and teeth. It’s also good for your immune system as it helps to reduce inflammation.	Eggs, fatty fish and mushrooms, cereals, fortified milk.
 Vitamin E	 Prevents infections, good blood circulation, and immune system. It also acts as an antioxidant to protect cells from damage. 	 Nuts, whole grains, sunflower seeds and tomatoes, vegetable oils, salad dressings
 Vitamin K	 Good for blood clotting and promotes bone health	 Leafy greens, eggs, milk, spinach, broccoli, sprouts, etc.
 Vitamin A	 Good for vision, teeth and skin, also promotes general growth and development of bones.	 Carrots and other orange foods including sweet potato, vegetable oils, leafy green vegetables, whole grains, nuts
 Vitamin C	 Good for the immune system. It helps to prevent infections, strengths blood vessels and give skin its elasticity. It has an antioxidant function.	 Oranges, lemons, red and green peppers, kiwi, grapefruits, strawberries, potatoes, broccoli, bell peppers, spinach, tomatoes
 B vitamin 

(B1, B2, B3, B5, B6, B12)

 B-group vitamins are necessary for health. Each of the B vitamins performs unique and important functions. They benefit the body in many ways: energy production, immune function, promote healthy hair, skin, and nails, etc. 	 Ham, soymilk, watermelon, acorn squash, milk, eggs, yogurt, cheese, meats, green leafy vegetables, grains and cereals, fish, meat, poultry, fruits
 Calcium	 It promotes healthy teeth and bones. Helps with muscle contractions, blood clotting, and nerve impulse transmission.	 yogurt, cheese and milk, fatty fish
 Iron	 It‘s essential for good health. Helps in building muscles naturally and maintaining healthy blood.  	 Liver, nuts, red meat, poultry, eggs, fruits, cereal, pumpkin seeds, beans, lentils, and spinach
 Zinc	 It benefits the body in many ways: it’s important to immunity, growth, and fertility.	 Spinach, cashews, beans, red meat, poultry, oysters, beans, nuts
 Chromium	 Needed for regulation of glucose in the body; it’s essential in the metabolism of fats and carbohydrates; it enhances insulin sensitivity	 Whole grains, fresh vegetables and herbs, poultry, fish, meat,  eggs, potatoes, some cereals, nuts, cheese
Are you getting enough of the 10 essential vitamins? Vitamins are needed in small amounts every day in order to stay healthy. Eating foods rich in essential vitamins and nutrients helps us work properly, look healthy and feel healthy. 