HOW TO CHOOSE A GOOD TRAINER?
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: SPORT
Photo of a good trainer
Facebook Twitter  Share
The same size of the clothes doesn’t fit everybody, the same principle can be found in education and training – one and the same method can’t be used with everybody. Experts have shared the tips on how to choose a good trainer. 

1. Personality is important. 
Do not be afraid to try different coaches, this will help you to choose the best one. Personal characteristics are of great importance when choosing a good coach. Your trainer may have all the qualifications and the experience of the world, but if he can’t develop good relationships with his clients, such trainings will lead to a failure. 

2. A good coach places a client in the first place. 
The very first training session will tell a lot. It is impossible to build up the program if you do not know the person and the aims he wants to achieve from these workouts. Your trainer should be aware of your goals, he must know your history, likes, dislikes, and current capabilities, and areas of pain. 

3. Your trainer should have big ears and big heart. 
Good trainer knows how to listen to a person with compassion. This should be your friend, who will listen with sympathy. 

4. A good coach never stops learning. 
Make sure your trainer has a special license for this activity as well as have the possibilities for self-development. Fitness industry is very changeable, so it’s very important to have a trainer who keeps up with the latest trends. 

5. A good trainer knows what “personal training” means. 
When you pay good money for personal training, you deserve more than a usual workout. Every coach has in store favorite exercises that can be used with every client. The question is…whether you trainings are really personal? Does your coach know about your fitness goals? Did he develop a special program for you? Your trainings shouldn’t be watery; they should be specific, hard and aimed at achieving your goals



