10 EXCITING STORIES ABOUT LOVE
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
A painted heart
Facebook Twitter  Share
In Internet a very interesting project Makes Me Think was opened, which collects small stories or phrases of ordinary people - about life, death, love, happiness, or sorrow ... about everything! 

1. About the power of opportunities…and love
"Today I have led my daughter to the altar. Ten years ago I took out a 14-year-old boy from a burning SUV of his mother after a serious accident. Doctors initially told that he would never walk again. My daughter came with me to the hospital a couple of times to visit the boy, and then she started to come by herself. Today I saw him, smiling widely, standing on his two feet - at a time when he wore a ring on the finger of my daughter".

2. About the ability to give other people's debts
"Today I told my 18-year-old grandson that nobody asked me to go to the prom when I finished school, so I did not go. He showed up at my house this evening, dressed in a suit and invited me to his prom".

3. About faithfulness
"Today, when she has waken up from the 11-month coma, she kissed me and said, "Thank you for being here and telling me these wonderful stories and for what not leaving me .... And yes, I will marry you".

4. About romance at any age
"Today I was sitting in the park, eating my sandwich for lunch, when I saw a car that drove up to an old oak and I saw an elderly couple. The sounds of good jazz were heard from the car. Then a man came out of the car and helped his lady to come out, and for the next half hour they danced to the sounds of jazz under the old oak tree ".

5. About the ability to give life
"Today, I urgently operated a little girl. She needed a certain type of blood - we did not have it. But it was her twin brother who had it. I explained the situation to him, and he asked whether we really need his blood, and it was a matter of life and death for his sister. He sat silently for a moment, and then said goodbye to his parents and went to donate blood. I did not think anything like that - until the moment when he asked, "And when will I die"? He thought that he would need to give all his blood to his sister in order she may live. Fortunately, the operation was successful, and both of them are doing well".

6. When the whole world is enough
"Today, my eight year old son hugged me and said, "You are the best mom in the world". I smiled and sarcastically asked, "How can you know? You haven’t seen all the moms in the world." My son hugged me tight and said, "I’ve seen. You are my world".

7. About love that does not require disclosure
"Today, I found out that my older brother has gone through bone marrow 16 times - all in order to help to cure my cancer. He talked to my doctor and I didn’t know about anything, and I didn’t ask him to do it. And today, I’ve learned that the treatment I’ve been taking the last few months has helped, and the cancer retreated".

8. About the chance to live and to love
"Today I’ve reread my deathbed letter which I wrote on the 2nd of September, 1996, firmly intending to commit suicide. I wrote two minutes before my girlfriend came to visit me and said, "I'm pregnant." And all of a sudden, there was a reason to live. Today, she is my wife, my daughter is almost 15 years old and she has two younger brothers. I reread his deathbed letter from time to time - as a reminder that I should be grateful for the second chance to live and to love".

9. About the small signs of great importance
"Today, like every day for the past two months, I came back from school with traces of burns on my face. Before that, I spent nearly a month in the hospital being treated for injuries sustained in a fire of my house. And today, as ever of the past 60 days, a rose was placed on the handle of the door of my house. I have no idea who does this. I even tried several times to come back home earlier - but the rose was already waiting for me".

10. About the importance of being together all the time
"Today, to my language classes for deaf people a woman has come, she had her larynx removed in an attempt to beat the cancer. Along with her to school came her husband, four children, two sisters, brother, mother, father and 12 close friends. They all wanted to be able to continue to communicate with her even after she lost the ability to speak".
