HANAMI: TRADITION OF ADMIRING CHERRY BLOSSOM IN JAPAN

Cherry blossom
Facebook Twitter  Share
Cherry blossom is the most important spring event in the Japanese culture; Japanese themselves call this admiration Hanami. 

Cherry blossom starts in Okinawa in early January, on Hokkaido first blossom appears in May, but mostly trees are in flowers near the end of March. Official beginning of blossom starts with the blooming of cherry trees that grow in the ancient Buddhist temple in Tokyo. After the appearance of the first flowers meteorological services begin to talk about the beginning of cherry blossom season. Its duration is about two weeks. 

During Hanami parks, alleys, Buddhist temples and shrines are visited by a large number of tourists and locals. Blossom Festival is a big event in Japan. You can enjoy the blooms in the daytime and at night. Evening walks among the sakura trees are very popular, because in the evening the trees are artfully illuminated. These evening walks are filled with romance and magic. Hanami is the time of picnics among the blooming trees. You can enjoy Hanami anywhere where there is a cherry tree in bloom, but no doubt there are places that during the history have become favorites. 

In Tokyo, the most popular destination for admiration of cherry blossoms is Ueno-koen, where there are over 1,000 cherry blossoms. In Shinjuku-Gyoen, in one of the largest parks of Tokyo, you can also enjoy the beauty of the cherry blossoms, but this place is not so crowded. In Kyoto the most popular place is Maruyama-koen. 

The tradition of admiring cherry blossoms appeared at the Imperial Palace in the Heian period. Aristocracy spent a long time under the blossoming cherry trees admiring them. Short but brilliant cherry blossoming they compared to the transience of life, but the falling blossom identified with courage and clarity of thought. 

The best place to enjoy the cherry blossoms is the mountain-top Kansai, which is located in Yoshino, where the blossoms of thousands of cherry trees form a floral carpet. It’s definitely an event that worth of travelling, but you have to be prepared for the fact that you will be surrounded by hundreds of tourists. 

Important to know: If you choose the most popular places to enjoy the cherry blossoms, then be prepared that you’ll need to find the place for the picnic early in the morning. If you want to enjoy the cherry blossoms in Yoshino, you'll have to book a day trip to the city, unless you have booked a hotel room in advance. 

They say that the transience of cherry blossom corresponds to the peculiarities of the Japanese character. And a tradition to have picnic under the blooming cherry trees is associated with a legend that if pollen falls into a cup of sake, the person will receive strength and health. 


