10 THINGS THAT EVERYONE SHOULD TRY
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: TIPS OF THE DAY
Photo of a beautiful girl
Facebook Twitter  Share
To live in another country
Immerse yourself in another culture, living in a country unknown to you. Most countries offer visa for 60 or 90 days, and it should be noted that there is a huge difference between being a tourist and a resident in a country. You start to see the country from the other angle. Take a chance and try! 

Take a trip from coast to coast
At least once in your life take a chance and drive across the country, enjoying its beauty. Landscapes, emotions and experiences that you get, will remain in your memory forever. 

Don’t forget to break your heart
No one wants to be hurt on purpose, but the emotional pain is an integral part of life and often is needed for the development of such qualities as compassion and empathy. Also, this experience will help you to know and appreciate true love when you will meet it on your way. 

Take a leap of faith
It’s great when everything in life goes smoothly and every choice is predetermined. But sometimes it’s very important to trust and to take this leap of faith into something unknown. Most likely, this path will lead you to a more interesting place than the one that has been logically predicted. 

Pay back
Has life been good to you? Now it’s your turn to use your time, talent and hard-earned money to help those who were less fortunate. You will not only improve the lives of people, but you also enrich your life. 

Take a vacation
Everyone dreams of a vacation for a year, but not everybody decides to take this step. Be one of those who are capable of doing this. Save money and go travelling, fulfill your dream and plan a new stage of your life. 

Adopt a homeless pet
There is no surer way to enjoy life than to share life with an animal you love. Pets love us without any reservations or conditions, they teach us to love and make us better. 

Do what scares you most
If you decide to climb a mountain, to jump with a parachute or ride on a giant roller coaster, you can overcome your fears and you will grow as a person. 

Defend your opinion
Get up and fight against injustice, defend the principles in which you believe. If you are sure you are right, then proceed with courage, no matter what the risk is. 

Do whatever you like
Far too often we choose to work based not on our desires and interests, but on material benefits that we will receive. Too few people have a job, which becomes the true meaning of their lives. 
