Farm mechanization

 

Indian agriculture has been going through a series of crises such as rising number of suicides among farmer, mounting rural indebtedness and swelling rural to urban migration, for over decade now.  The long-term viability of agriculture and the survival of the farming community itself are at stake, with the World Trade organization (WTO) and structural adjustment programme finally beginning to spread.  All these coincide with the time when Indian agriculture is faced with dealing productivity, failing commodity prices and sluggish exports.  Sustainability thus fees major and unprecedented crisis.  Green Revolution regions like Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh are encountering serious bottlenecks to growth and productivity.

Her political stability is a matter of concern not only for her own people but also for other nations also.  Having an international Juvenile delinquent country (Pakistan) with endless potential for mischief as a neighbor, she needs to maintain constant and strong vigilance to ensure the security of her frontiers and internal strife’s. He will have enough evidence at his disposal to conclude that India was one upon a time a leader of a glorious civilization.  The fact that Indian arts have withstood the onslaught of ages and are thriving till today will convince him about the potentiality of the country’s future.  That the country has had a very strong cultural footage in ancient times when almost whole of the western world was in a deep slumber of pre-developmental stage and that the country was quite ahead in thought and deed would surely convince him. And naturally there must be a strong background and history behind such products.

Social the preamble to the Constitution of India stresses the importance of Justice-Social; Economic Justice is a phrase with different connotations in different countries and under different economists and sociologists.  In developing countries under a democratic structure, social justice means, about everything else, distributive justice or a broadly egalitarian socio-economic order. The state of affairs in almost every field is pitiable. 

All of them do no suit neither the students nor the society for which they are going to be prepared.  The hue and cry about the curricula and pattern of examinations is so great that some people consider it the real bane of the system and every time when there is a revising of text books and the curricula, the changes worsen the position and do not solve the main problem. It is generally felt that the authorities pay inadequate attention to the problems and are not able to see through the psychologies of the students and the environment for which they are going to be trained and this general carelessness has cost the country heavily. 

The human tragedies resulting from unemployment may lead industrial societies to reconsider that, except for the dullest, most repetitive and painful tracks, human beings are better than machines-and certainly more creative. If we are to cut ten trees to make a road, it should be imperative to raise twenty around to compensate the loss.  Regarding the expansion of urban areas equally comprehensive planning needs to be adopted.  Sufficient green areas should not only be left out of constructions but a sufficient number of trees and green belts should be developed to give enough good look and compensate for the damage in environment.

High-yielding varieties of seeds and use of fertilizers can double out food production from the same area of cultivation.  At the same time, the use of machines like tractors, disc harrows and threshers can save valuable time of r the farmers to take three crops in a year instead of two paving way for additional income for the farmers.  Using such biotech seeds is also a part of modern methods of agriculture which are necessary to bring a Second Green Revolution in India.