MISTAKES IN SOCIAL NETWORKS AND YOUR CAREER


There are 5 major mistakes of posting information on social networks, which can ruin your career. 

One wrong tweet and you may find yourself without a job. There are various examples of people lost their jobs due to the fact that they began to discuss issues outside of the workplace, specifically in social networks. 
It is not known what has happened o these people afterwards, but it is known that the company is monitoring web pages of its employees. 

So what should be done in order not to loose the career and to spend time on the social networks? 

Mistake #1: You are not aware of the policy of your company
Most of the companies due to the pressure of social media review their privacy policies. And even if your contract does not mention anything about this policy, you should go to the needed department of the company and clarify all the points concerning the privacy policy of the company. 

Mistake #2: You fire up controversy
Advertising of political and religious beliefs in social networks has become almost the norm these days. But for many companies, it does not fit their politics, and can lead to penalties. If a company has a policy of loyalty, it will stick to it in everything, and your personal opinion you better leave with you. 

Mistake #3: You're too negative online
You probably would not have gone around the office, talking about how bad your days are, and complaining about your life. That is why you should not do this in social networks. After all, your rude and negative comments will not go unnoticed. 

Mistake #4: Do you accept the friendship invitation from your boss? 
This is not a good idea to add your boss as a friend. You can change the profile and make it as much private as possible. But if the request has been received, you can clear your profile or accept the invitation, but be very careful with what you post on social networks or with what you say. 

Mistake #5: You treat all social networks the same
If you try to develop your personal brand, then, of course, you have to be active in various social networks. But none of your statements should be associated with your direct employment. 

Be vigilant, careful and you will succeed! 
