10 PROFESSIONS THAT ARE MORE PROFITABLE FOR WOMEN
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: CAREER
A successful woman
Facebook Twitter  Share
Despite the fact that the gap between the salaries of men and women has decreased, there is still a tendency to pay men more than women. Here is the list of occupations where women succeed better than a man. 

Auditor 
The study conducted by the web-site GlassDoor.com showed that female auditor earns on average 14% more than the male representative in this profession. Experts also point out that in the areas of financial gap between male and female wages is insignificant because women with economic education can knock out a decent salary for them. 

Model
The model market is a discrimination of men. Indeed, in this fashion industry men tend to earn up to 148% less than women. 

Doctor’s assistant
Statistical Office of the United States says that female doctor’s assistants earn 4% more than their male colleagues. We can say that this situation is common for almost all middle-level medical personnel. In this industry, women earn more than men. 

Oncologist
Representatives of the web-site PayScale.com say that female oncologists earn 10% more than men. 

Real estate agent
GlassDoor.com statistics show that women who sell real estate are able to earn an additional 5%. Their ability to persuade and provide a sense of confidence in their clients helps them to sell more. 

Stockbroker
There is a stereotype that trade on the stock exchange only men. But that's just a stereotype. On the stock exchanges the number of women exceeds the number of men. According to statistics, 55% of all licensed brokers are women. 

Beauty industry representatives
Stylist, hairdresser, manicurist or other representatives of the industry earn more if they are women. And they get 0.7% more than men. But if we talk about the hairstylist, in this profession men succeed better than women, they can easier to find customers, and are paid much better then women. 

The representative of the personnel department
PayScale.com says that in the field of personnel management reigns equality between men and women. In this area, all offset, talking about the administrative work, the men get here a little more than women, but women managers of HR-departments earn more than 1.8%. Due to these small numbers the compensation is managed. 

Psychologist
Women psychologists receive 2.6% more then men psychologist, as evidenced by data collected by Statistics United States. And they get more no matter of their place of work: whether it is a private clinic, or state social service. 

Chemist
Female chemist, for unknown reasons, receives 2.5% more than men. And it can be applied to other professions in this field also. For example, a female junior researcher will receive approximately 7% more than her male colleague. 

