TOP 10 ATTRACTIONS OF THE CITY OF ANGELS

Los Angeles is a dream city for many, young and old want to visit the city and enjoy its beauty. 

So, what to see and to visit in Los Angeles? 
1. First of all visit Hollywood. Walk around this fascinating area near Egyptian and Chinese theaters, and be sure to visit the famous Kodak Theatre, where the annual Oscar ceremony takes place, and where the world's annual film stars shine on the red carpet. 

2. Next, head to the Hollywood Walk of Fame, which stretches for 18 blocks. Walk along this famous avenue and look for a star of your favorite movie star. 

3. Another essential point of the program is a trip to the Griffith Observatory, where you can observe the starry sky in a huge telescope. Here you can also enjoy views of the Pacific Ocean and the central part of Los Angeles. If the weather is permitting, then you will be able to see the famous white letters "Hollywood" on the hills. 

4. Also dedicate a whole day trip to the studio "Warner Brothers" or "Universal Studio". In both of these film platforms you can learn how to make films; you will learn many of the secrets of special effects. In addition, you can enjoy the various attractions here and feel yourself as a movie star. 

5. In the evening, head to Rodeo Drive, which is located in Beverly Hills, as well as walk along one of the main streets of the city - along Wilshire Boulevard. 

6. Visit Memorial Coliseum, where Olympic Games were held twice in 1932 and 1984. There's also a huge park, the zoo, many museums and exhibitions that are situated in this region. 

7. Be sure to sit in one of the cafes in Downtown, and observe the speed of life in this city. 

8. After downtown, you can walk to the Chinese, Korean, Japanese and Armenian districts that are situated near Downtown. Here you will see a Buddhist temple, the East Gate and the Golden Pagoda, as well as lots of fountains. The streets of these districts are decorated with red lanterns and delicious traditional food will impress any foodie. 

9. Another stop could be Walt Disney Concert Hall, where the concerts of Philharmonic Orchestra are held. 


10. And finally, take a ride on the shortest railway in the world, at the old funicular Angels Flight. 

