Science- A Blessing or A Curse
Science has revolutionized the human existence. Much of the progress that mankind has made in different fields right from the stone age to the modern age is due to the progress made in the field of science. Not only material progress but also the mental outlook of man has been influenced by it. It has made man’s life more comfortable. Agriculture, business, transport, communication and medicine to name a few are all highly indebted to the wonders science has produced.

Electricity is one of the greatest wonders of modern science. It is a source of energy. It can run any type of machinery. With the help of electricity, we can light our rooms run buses and trains, and lift water for irrigation.

The discovery and development of a large number of powerful energy sources coal, petroleum, natural gas, electricity, etc. have facilitated the growth of fast modes of transport an communication, which in turn have changed the world into a global village. Science has given man the means of travelling cars, trains, ships, etc. Man has even travelled to the moon. Faster means of transport can be utilized for sending food grains to victims of famine or epidemics across the globe, for transporting armed men for fighting in distant places.

Science has benefited agriculture too. The food production levels and quality have improved. Soil analysis, hybrid verities of crops, fertilizers, pesticides, advanced tools and machinery, improved irrigation methods, etc. have all contributed to the increase of the production of crops.

Today we have metrological satellites in outer space sending data and pictures to earth stations helping agriculture scientists find and analyses soil patterns. They also help them trace the progress of rains winds and even locusts that endanger crops. Satellites can even forewarn about natural calamities like hurricanes which cause mass destruction.

Man with the help of science, has been able to increase longevity, arrest the gradual decay of human body and control the spread of lethal diseases by making extraordinary life prolonging drugs and medicines. Diseases like tuberculosis and many kinds of cancer which were considered fatal a few decades ago are no longer incurable.

One of the biggest achievements of science is in the field of entertainment. Leisure management industry, with television shows, music concerts and films, is emerging as emerging as the largest and the most important industry in the twenty first century satellite television has made it possible for millions of people to watch sporting and entertainment events taking place in different parts of the world simultaneously.

Information technology and computer have revolutionized our lifestyle. Automation in banks and railways stations has provided relief to the public and staff alike. Ticketing and reservation have become more efficient and convenient. In medical diagnosis, computers are used to locate and investigate accurately and reservation have become more efficient convenient. In medical diagnosis, computers are used to locate and investigate accurately and precisely any abnormalities or diseases. The internet has some very useful applications in our day to day life. Mobile phones are the outcome of information technology. But at the same time it cannot be denied that the boon in many cases has turned out to be the bane. There are innumerable examples which prove that science a blessing has been turned into a curse.

Sir Alfred Nobel experience with dynamite to clear huge mountains to turn it into productive lands. But modern man uses it to kill his fellow human beings and destroy nature. It is a fact that much of the national income of a developing country is spent on acquiring latest weapons, bombs and missiles. Guns, revolvers, tanks and fighter planners’ explosives nuclear bombs, etc were invented to develop a strong security system to protect the innocent masses, but their misuse is now crushing humanity. Apart from atomic weapons man has also started stockpiling biological and chemical weapons. These weapons are equally dangerous.

Biotechnology is a great boon for fighting disease. But along with medicines lethal biological weapons have also been developed. Germs are deliberately released into the air to spread diseases. Anthrax envelopes are used for spreading terrorism.

The negative effects of the excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides, used to increase yield are now evident. Soil salinity has increases. Traces of DDT are found in plants.

The power of the internet is also being abused through unhealthy practice such as the widespread use of pornographic materials. Lots of people spend their time in chat rooms for obscene discussions.

Science has two faces good and bad. It depends on us which face we want to see. If we use the gifts of science in a positive manner with positive intention and in positive direction it will benefit the mankind, but if we misuse it, it will prove harmful to all. To save ourselves and the world as a whole from destruction, we should use the gifts of science properly.

 

Essay No. 2

Science – A Blessing or Curse

This is the age of science and technology. Science has changed the face of the earth with its too many wonderful inventions and discoveries. If one of our ancestors were to return to the earth, he or she would not be able to recognize it – so tremendous, complete and fundamental has been the change.

Science has benefited mankind in an unprecedented manner by its wonderful progress and development. And still the development, research, inventions and discoveries are going on a very fast track. These are of fundamental nature and of far reaching consequences, also much so that the world would get further transformed unrecognizably.

Science touches all of us and our life at every step, as a big boon and blessing. It has helped us to conquer space and time. The world has now become a global village, thanks to very fast and reliable means of travel and communication. Science has also helped man to conquer the moon and to explore the outer space. Many a fatal disease is now checked and eradicated. The great and significant researches in the fields, of agriculture, irrigation, water – management, etc,. have helped in developing new variety of seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, and effective methods of water conservation. These benefits and facilities were not available to our forefathers.

The use of computers and super computers has further revolutionized our life and work with the dawn of scientific era, the barriers of the nations are crumbling fast and the international living and interaction are very much in sight. Nations and countries have come close rand isolation has  been eliminated. A new composite culture marked with greater tolerance and understanding , and secularism is now assured. In a sense, science has unified the world and reduced differences in outlook and thinking. By removing many superstitions and blind beliefs, modern science has inculcated scientific temper and spirit in man to great extent.

Because of science and technology there has been tremendous progress in the fields of industry, commerce and human resources development as well. Consequently, there is a new world economic order in sight and the gap between the developed and developed countries are being reduced. The new economic order ensures a great industrial and corporate cooperation, globalization, expansion and liberalization among the nations. The quality of life and standard of living, in various underdeveloped and developing countries, have improved and the countries are likely to be upgraded further. The contribution of science in the betterment of human life has been great and significant and further expectations from it are no less significant or great. The boons and blessings of science assure us further strengthening of human equality, fraternity and liberty.

Man feels more safe, secure, comfortable and important. Today than ever before, because of scientific development and advancement. The day is not far off when we shall have colonies on the moon and the planets. Science has achieved much, and promises to achieve still more and more in the years to come. Science has tamed forces of nature, conquered space  and time, eradicated  may fatal diseases given us food clothing etc. , enough to spare. Now there are no more famines, epidemics and pestilences. Science ahs even pushed further  the threats of death and increased the average longevity of man.

But science has been a mixed blessing. It has been a boon and blessing in certain fields; it has also proved a curse and bane in many others. It has given us many dangerous and destructive weapons like atom and hydrogen bombs and missiles. During the second world War itself 300,000 people died in Hiroshima and Nagasaki when the USA dropped atom bombs there in 1945. The biological and chemical weapons  are still more destructive. The bombs and other means of mass destruction now produced are far more lethal and powerful than used in 1945. The biological and chemical weapons are still more dangerous and destructive. They have the added advantage, as the source of attack can remain hidden and unidentified to a great extent. These weapons can be used to declaration of war. Then there are well- organized terrorist groups spread all over the world. They use these weapons in their desperation and sue unprecedented deaths and ruination.

Shakespeare has said that there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so. There have been many scientific researches and discoveries which have unfortunately been hijacked to harmful destructive paths. It is reported that about half a million scientists are now employed on weapon research through hour the world. The huge amount of money spent on these dangerous recherché fan    exceeds the amount of money being spent on developing technologies for new energy resources, improving human health, raising agricultural productivity, controlling  pollution, etc.

At the end of the last world war, many of the scientists were taken away by the victorious countries for developing their own biological and chemical war  weapons. It is alleged that the outbreak of plague in India in 1994 was genetically engineered.

Obviously, science is being used so much for destructive purpose and so little for meeting real needs of humanity. This turns science into a bane. It is man who is ultimately responsible for turning science into a curse instead a blessing. By itself science can be said to  a blessing , boon or bonanza; the bane and cures are brought about by our wrong orientation and priorities.

The misuse of science has ushered in our life many undesirable elements. There has been erosion in man’s faith in sod and religion. Morality and ethics have been marginalized and materialism has increased unprecedented. Rapid , unplanned and indiscriminate industrialization has resulted in pollution on a vast scale. No doubt , science and technology has taken giant strides in recent times, but it has dehumanized human life in the same proportion.

Human values have been pushed in the background and man has become more selfish, cruel , sensual, violent and destructive. There is no more simple living and high thinking. But let us hope that ultimately sanity prevails and science is used more and more for the benefit of mankind. It depends solely upon man himself how he uses science and its discoveries and researches. Science as knowledge and power is neither savior nor destroyer.

 

Essay No. 03

 

Science is a Blessing, not a Curse 

Science is important in today’s life. We cannot live without science in the modern world. Science can be called one of the greatest blessings of this age. We owe all our progress to it. Today we can go round the globe in a matter of hours. Inventions such as washing machine, refrigerator, air-conditioner, dishwasher and geyser make our lives easy. Television, cinema and compact discs have changed the entertainment industry. Thousands of lives are saved every day due to the progress of medical science. It is impossible to run a company or a factory without a computer. We can also say that computers are the greatest invention of modern age. However., r science has also brought a lot of misery upon man. Nuclear weapons can destroy our planet several times over.

It is not impossible to remove at least some of the curses of  science. We must resolve to use it only to make life better for man. We must also not pollute our planet or cut trees any more. We must not build any more arms until every man has food on his plate. In this way, we can build a better world. Science is, at its heart, a quest; a quest whose goal is to create an understanding of the universe. In fact, science attempts to quantify reality. It does this in many ways; through experimentation and observation, through theorizing and testing. This quest has been undergoing since the birth of mankind and yet the further we go the further away the end of the quest seems to be. Despite this, it has been theorized that man will eventually understand the universe through science and its relentless quest for knowledge. Not only has it been said that this is likely, but it has been said that this understanding lies mere decades away from the present. Is this possible, not only mere decades from the present, but is it possible, at all, to achieve an understanding of the universe? In short, no. The extended answer, however, takes a little more time.

First, to begin the answer to this question, it is necessary to understand what is meant by understanding the universe. It means “the act of one who comes to know the meaning of; who apprehends”. Well, in the realm of science, understanding the universe would probably entail the creation of a TOE (Theory of Everything). The TOE is to the theoretical physicist as the holy grail was to King Arthur; it is the most desirable peak of achievement. To the uninitiated, a TOE is a theorem that explains, literally, everything, from the motion of subatomic particles to the existence of black holes and the motion of galaxies. The TOE would, in effect, explain the behaviour and nature of everything in the universe. It could, in effect be a way through which we could understand the universe and it has been theorized that such a theory is not far away.

Does this theory, however, if it is created, indicate that we do understand in full, the nature of the universe. The answer is, simply Put, no; not in any regards at all. First of all, the creation of a TOE that works does not even mean that it is right. It is possible that any formula created may function out of mere coincidence instead of out of a profound truth. Discounting this fact for a moment, the  creation of a formula in no way imparts understanding. Man has discovered and expressed the speed of light (in vacuum) as being 3 x 108 m/s. However, this in no way means that everyone understands this and, in fact, it is improbable that anyone can even begin to imagine this speed. Thus, how can we hope to derive understanding out of a formula that would be almost infinitely more complicated then a mere number? The answer is, of course, that most of us, if not all, could not begin to understand such a formula much less its implications or meanings. Why, however, can we not hope to understand such things? Are we not sane, rational beings? Well, to put it simply, human beings seem far to simple to actually understand the universe in all of its entirety, even if it is reduced to a formula. It has been theorized that there are hundreds of billions of galaxies each containing an equal number of solar systems. Despite this, most stars’ closest neighbour is more than 10 light years away. How could a human mind, being comprised such a tiny amount of brain cells, hope to understand something so big? The fact is that there is such a limited capacity in the human mind that such understanding almost unequivocally escapes us.

 

Essay No. 04

 

Science – A Blessing or A Curse

Science has benefited man in several ways. It has made man’s life more comfortable, more secure and more powerful. But it is not an unmixed blessing. There are several disadvantages of science.  However, the advantages far outweigh the disadvantages.

In the early stages of civilization, man used to be scared of the natural forces. Thunder, storm and lightning frightened him. He used to worship every object of nature-sky, earth, trees, air, sun and moon. Even animals were worshipped. It was because man could not understand the natural phenomena and he wanted to keep those forces happy. So he did that by bowing before them. He believed that if he kept those forces happy, they would not hurt him. He was, in short, a slave of nature.  But today, man has become the master of nature. His area of knowledge is vast, his power over nature immense. His mastery of the sky and the earth is nearly complete. The moon and other objects no longer fill man with fear. The earth holds few secrets not known to man. How has this tremendous change come about?

Science has revolutionized the human existence. Take, for instance, electricity which is one of the many gifts of science. All one has to do is to press a button.  The room is flooded with light, the fan begins to whirr and give refreshing air, or still more, a desert cooler or an air conditioner turns the room into a hill resort. Thousand types of machines are run by electricity. Room heaters, electric ovens and cooking ranges and several other household appliances are operated by electricity. It runs factories which produce innumerable things of our daily use.

Science has also relieved to a great extent human suffering. Advance in the field of medicine and surgery have reduced the rate of infant mortality. The average life span of man has increased. Today, many the dreaded diseases like cholera, small-pox and even tuberculosis are easily curable with the help of medicines. Surgery can remove malignant also proved to be harmful. The machine age made many people unemployed. Now there is no need for so many hands to do a task. Only one person is required to manipulate the machine. Thus, it has led to unemployment.

Machines have also led to degradation of our environment. The poisonous fumes and gases emitted by vehicles and industrial units have polluted the air we breathe and pose a threat to the health of the people.

In the light of all these grave dangers, it is imperative that man tries to make judicious use of machines. After all, man had applied his mind to invent new things not to make his life miserable, but to make it more comfortable and better.  Machines should serve mankind. Man should ensure that he does not allow them to destroy his environment and health and put the life of all living things in grave danger beyond a point of no return.