10 PRODUCTS THAT PREVENT BREAST CANCER

Facebook Twitter  Share
Beans

Researchers found out that women who eat beans at least twice a week, have lower rates of breast cancer than those who eat beans and other legumes less. 

Blueberries 

Fresh blueberries are an excellent source of antioxidants including chlorogenic acid, which is known for its anti-cancer properties. Blueberries also contains a large amount of pigment anthocyanin, which gives the berry its color. Antioxidant power is measured in ORAC units (oxygen radical absorbance capacity), and blueberries received the highest number of ORAC units than any other fruit or vegetable. 

Broccoli 

Broccoli is rich in sulphoraphane, a plant chemical, which inhibits the growth of breast cancer cells. 

Flax seeds

Researchers from the University of Toronto found that women who suffer from breast cancer and who ate two tablespoons of flaxseed per day were able to slow down the growth of cancer cells. 

Garlic

Laboratory studies show that the allyl sulfur and other compounds contained in garlic, contribute to slower growth of tumor cells. 

Green tea

Green tea is an excellent source of powerful antioxidants catechines. Studies have shown that women who drink green tea are less likely to develop breast cancer. 

Mushrooms 

Portobello, button mushrooms and shiitake mushrooms have anticancer properties. Doctors and nutritionists say that mushrooms contain more antioxidants than pumpkin, carrots or tomatoes. Mushrooms contain lots of ergothioneine and selenium (immune stimulating antioxidants), which reduce the risk of development of cancer and cardiovascular diseases. It should be mentioned that shiitake mushrooms and maitake mushrooms are rich in beta-glucan, a chemical that is able to reboot the immune system and prevent cancer. 

Spinach

Spinach is rich in beta-carotene and lutein, powerful antioxidants. Studies show that in order to prevent the development of breast cancer a woman should eat spinach at least twice a week. 

Salmon

Researchers from the University of Southern California and the National University of Singapore found that postmenopausal women who ate an average of 1.5 to 3 ounces of fish or shellfish per day reduce the chances of developing breast cancer by 26%.


