
FINE ARTS OR 10 PAINTINGS, WHICH ARE WORTH MILLIONS

If you think that the picture of Malevich "The Black Square" is absurd and not logical, then you need to look through the list we present to you today. These pictures are worth millions, but in the opinion of many they are not worth a single drop of attention. Many of these paintings are considered simply absurd. 

10th place: Blood Red Mirror (Gerhard Richter)
Painting Blood Red Mirror of the famous German artist Gerhard Richter was sold in 2009 for $ 1.1 million. The picture was actually written in a blood-red paint, and was actually written on the mirror. 



9th place: Concetto spaziale, Attese (Lucio Fontana) 
The picture of the famous Italian painter and sculptor Lucio Fontana was sold in 2010 for $ 1.5 million. Fontana was the progenitor of the flow of cut pictures that reflect the idea of ritualism through the monotony of the paintings. 





8th place: Green White (Elsuort Kelly) 
The picture of the famous American artist Elsuort Kelly depicts a green circle. This painting was purchased for $ 1.6 million, and was considered to be a perfect example of a color field painting. 







7th place: Untiled (Stoffbild) (Blinky Palermo) 
It should be said that all the pictures of German abstract artist Blinky Palermo does not have a name, or rather, are called "Untitled." This painting was sold for $ 1.7 million. 





6th place: Cowboy (Elsuort Kelly) 
Another work of the American artist this time brought him a profit of 1.7 million dollars. Although the picture is called "Cowboy", but you must stare for a long time in order to see this cowboy. 







5th place: Peinture (Joan Miró) 
All the pictures of the famous Spanish master Joan Miro are characterized by the presence of childhood. And this picture is no exception. It has captivated the heart of the buyer that he paid for it $ 2.2 million. 






4th place: Untitled (Cy Twombly) 
The painting by Cy Twombly resembles the letter E, for which a buyer decided to pay 2.3 million dollars. This is the second picture in this list that does not have a name. 







3rd place: White Fire (Barnett Newman) 
For the painting "White Fire" it was paid 3.08 million dollars. You should not judge people who can not appreciate the beauty of this kind of pictures. 






2nd place: Blue Fool (Christopher Wool) 
This is a picture of the artist in New York who specializes in paintings and inscriptions. "Fool," which was written in blue paint was bought for $ 5 million. 







1st place: Untitled (1961) (Mark Rothko) 
For the painting "Untitled" (1961) was paid 28 million dollars. This is a picture of a well-known American artist who was born in Latvia. 








