The Importance of Library 
Books are a man’s best friends. They give him company in times of happiness as well as in times of distress. They are one of the main sources of knowledge. The best place for easy access to books is a library.

A library is a place where not only books but also magazines, journals and newspapers are well stocked for the benefit of the readers. One can also get the atlas, encyclopedia, etc. to know even the minute details of a thing. It is a treasure house of knowledge. It helps the spread of education. A reader can either read in the library or borrow the books of his choice and take them home. The library is a popular place in the academic curriculum.

A well stocked library is an asset to a school, a college or a university. There are also neighborhood libraries and district libraries which benefit the readers of the area. A student or a reader can increase his knowledge of various subjects by reading in the library during his spare time. One can update one’s knowledge by reading regularly in a library.

A library needs a good librarian who should be well qualification in library science. Such a person can maintain the books properly. He can guide the students to select suitable books. He should be cheerful and co-operative. He should interact well with the readers. The readers can easily get the books they want.  If they consult the librarian. Thus the guidance’s of the librarian saves a lot of time of the readers. A good librarian welcomes suggestions from readers for the improvement of the library. He purchases new books after taking into consideration the needs of the readers.  

Normally, a library is housed in a very spacious hall but small libraries also function in small towns and villages. The furniture inside the library should be comfortable, neat and clean. Student’s readers should maintain strict discipline, so that others are not disturbed. The atmosphere in a library should be peaceful and scholarly.

A library has thousands of books in stock. It has books on various topics, subjects and events. New books are added from time to time. All the books are kept systematically. They are classified and indexed according to their subjects. The labeling of books helps the reader to get a particular book without any difficulty. To find out the library number of a particular book, one can take the help of the subject and author index. most libraries keep a book display rack where new arrivals are kept.

A library also keeps magazines, periodicals, newspapers and journals. These are kept on the reading table of the library. The readers can keep themselves equipped with current events and latest developments in various fields.

A reader should handle the books carefully so that no pages are torn or no books are misplaced. He should keep the books at the proper place after reading. The librarian should see that pin drop silence is maintained in the library. Readers should abide by the library rules.

A library issues membership cards to its readers. A reader or a student can borrow a book for home if he has that card. The books are issued for a limited period. If the reader does not return the book on the due date, he has to pay a fine as per the library rules. If a reader loses a book, he has to replace the lost book with a new one or pay the price of the book. The readers are supposed to keep the books in good condition.

The library is a boon for poor students who cannot afford to buy text books or other books of their interest. They can borrow these books and read them at ease at home. A library is thus a help to the society.

Most libraries have notice boards. They are used for writing important news of the day. A thought for the day is also written here. Tiles of new books added to the library are also displayed on the notice board to inform the students. Most libraries are open for a limited number of hours.

In recent years internet has revolutionized the concept of library. Information technology now plays an important role in improving the library facilities.

Internet makes it possible to deliver information in the shortest possible time at a required place. Today the entire world is linked through internet. But this facility is mostly available in urban areas.

With the growing popularity of internet ,which provides loads of information at just the click of a mouse, one  may pause to think about the decreasing relevance and importance of a library in today’s world. But one should keep in mind that a person goes to a library not only to search and get information from books but also to sit and study there. The peaceful and scholarly atmosphere there helps one to concentrate more on one work and study. Thus libraries will always serve a useful purpose. They will always be there to indicate the presence of a well read and educated society.

 

Essay No. 02

 

The Role of Libraries

It will be a cliche to point out that a library is a treasure house of knowledge. The books which are preserved in the liberary, are actually the lives of great minds and the place where they lie is a haloed place. But, so, these minds are not dead. They are very much alive. It is only that we should have the will and guts to speak to them.

A library is everything to man who wants to further his knowledge. He who wants to make some research in any field or he who wants to excel in studies or just to brush up his knowledge, can realize the real and full value of libraries.

It is of utmost significance that good libraries must be there in every city and town. Even big villages should have a library and or a reading room.

Books must be kept carefully in libraries. These should be managed by qualified persons who should arrange the books in a proper order such that any book which is required at any time, should be easily and quickly available.

Apart from public libraries, owned and managed by government, university and municipal agencies, there should be some good libraries which should be run by private persons who should have the will and spare funds for efficient running of libraries.

Any and every individual who loves books, has to maintain a small library in his house where he keeps books of his necessity and choice. These books should be well-bound and dusted frequently and they should be kept in proper order.  