EXTRAORDINARY SOLUTIONS FOR THE ROOFS

Facebook Twitter  Share
The roof is not always only a roof. Very often, homeowners are turning it into a real attraction. Nobody will be surprised by beautiful roofs, where plants grow or recreation area is located. But what else can you turn your roof into? 

Backyard

The Danish company JDS Architects develops projects of penthouses and on the roof of one of them they created a real backyard with playground, interesting ladders and lawns ... typical backyard, but located on the roof. 

Swimming pool

On the roof of the SkyPark complex in Singapore you will find a luxurious swimming pool. It seems that water just pours out out of it. This pool is located on the 55 floor of a skyscraper and its length is three times more than the length of a usual Olympic swimming pool. 

Camping

Trailer Park at roof can be found on the roof of Grand Daddy Hotel in Cape Town. Trailers are located on the rooftop, offering panoramic views of the city. Besides, they are not just usual trailers, they are antique Airstream Trailers. These trailers are also used as hotel rooms. 

Tennis court

The owners of the Burj Al Arab in Dubai arranged a tennis court on its roof. Famous tennis players Andre Agassi and Roger Federer were able to play a game there. 

Roller coaster on the roof

The owner of a building in Tokyo decided to please everybody by the amusement park, which he placed on the roof. But this roller coaster doesn’t work, as the vibrations that arise while operating can destroy the building. 

Bar

Nowadays there is not a surprise that a restaurant or a bar is located on the top floor of a skyscraper, but the open-air bar is something new. Sky Bar in Bangkok is located on the roof of the 63-storey building The Dome at State Tower, and is completely under the open sky. 

Cinema

An outdoor cinema can be found in Australia. Rooftop Cinema is located on the roof of a 6-storey building and is very popular among locals and tourists. 

Park 

In Singapore, Sky Gardens park complex is located on the roofs of the 50-storey building complex Pinnacle @ Duxton. Its total area is more than 9 hectares. 

Farm

On the roof of one of Chicago's buildings the farm with the area of 230 m² is located. Besides, it's not just a farm; it is a farm complex, which should provide fresh food to the restaurant Uncommon Ground, which is located under this roof. 
