12 MOST ELIGIBLE BILLIONAIRE BACHELORS ACCORDING TO FORBES

Facebook Twitter  Share
Statistic says that just 43, or 3%, of the world’s billionaires are single. Only 25 of those singles are men under the age of 60. Here is the list of the world’s 12 most eligible billionaire bachelors. 


 

Alejandro Santo Domingo Davila
Age: 36
Net worth: $11.7 billion
Country: Columbia
Young, dashing and Harvard-educated, he owns one of the world's largest beer fortunes and the private Caribbean island of Baru. 



Xavier Niel
Age: 45
Net worth: $6.6 billion
Country: France
A stake in a sex shop and peep show business once briefly landed Niel in jail after a prostitution investigation. Cleared of pimping charges, the serial entrepreneur is the largest individual shareholder in French telecommunications concern Iliad. Owner of the Frank Sinatra hit 'My Way'. 

Scott Duncan
Age: 30
Net worth: $5.1 billion
Country: USA
The most mysterious bachelor. Since his father passed away in 2010, Duncan has seen his net worth soar by $2 billion, thanks to the stake he inherited in pipeline powerhouse Enterprise Products Partners. 

Tor Peterson
Age: 48
Net worth: $2.3 billion
Country: USA
Peterson runs the commodity giant's coal and coke department from Switzerland. The California native graduated from Duke University in 1986. 



Eduardo Saverin
Age: 30
Net worth: $2.2 billion
Country: Brazil
Saverin emerged from Facebook with a 5% stake in the world's second most popular website, half of which he has already sold. The Harvard man renounced his American citizenship in 2011 and now resides in Singapore. 



Nicolas Berggruen
Age: 51
Net worth: $2.0 billion
Country: USA
After graduating from NYU, Berggruen began managing the family fortune, greatly expanding it over the decades. Pursuing him may prove challenging, as Berggruen has no permanent address; he lives out of hotels as he travels the globe. 



Richard Li
Age: 46
Net worth: $1.9 billion
Country: Hongkong
Li's father is the richest man in Asia, Li Ka-shing. In 1991 he borrowed $125 million from his father and launched satellite network StarTV. Five years later he sold the business to Rupert Murdoch for $950 million. 



Teddy Sagi
Age: 41
Net worth: $1.8 billion
Country: Israel
Sagi made his fortune with Playtech, a publicly traded British company that makes the software used by online gambling sites. He reportedly owns the most expensive home in Israel, for which he paid $35 million. 



Yoshikazu Tanaka
Age: 36
Net worth: $1.8 billion
Country: Japan
Tanaka founded mobile social gaming company Gree in 2004. Though the firm's profits and stock price have slumped over the past year. 



Albert von Thurn und Taxis
Age: 29
Net worth: $1.5 billion
Country: Germany
Albert von Thurn und Taxis first appeared on the Forbes list when he was just eight years old. One of the largest landowners in Europe, he spends a lot of his time racing cars, professionally. And he is a prince. 



Jack Dorsey
Age: 36
Net worth: $1.2 billion
Country: USA
Mr. Dorsey has founded successful technology companies such as Twitter ? Square. This Mister is yet single, though he was dating to the British model Lily Cole. If you want to melt his heart describe your feelings in 140 characters and tweet him to @jack. 



Stelios Haji-Ioannou
Age: 46
Net worth: $1.05 billion
Country: Cyprus
The founder of the British discount airline EasyJet prefers to be called by name only. In addition, he is a knight. 