THE MOST DANGEROUS SPORTS COMPETITIONS

Facebook Twitter  Share
Modern sport puts great importance to the development of security. New technologies are brought and very qualified professionals are involved. But there are sports where people consciously take risks in order to experience again and again the thrill and adrenaline jump. 

6. Bike races in Valparaiso
The small town of Valparaiso in Chile is known for the fact that here, since 2003, contest The Valparaiso Cerro Abajo Bike Race takes place. This competition is a four-minute race down the hill, which has a set of sharp turns, five meters ramps, and has a huge number of bumps and steps. 

5. Kite competition in Pakistan
Basant is a competition of kites. But why is it dangerous? All kites are equipped with blades, broken glass, and other cutting objects and the main goal of the competition is to bring other kites to the unsuitability. This festival is dangerous not only for the participants but also for the audience, because kites can fall and injure others. 






4. Fights with electroshock in the U.S. 
Participants of the competition are ready to get an electric shock of 3 million volts, but it is worth saying that after the tragic battles this contest was officially banned, but continues to have a lot of popularity. 


3. Cheese race
Each year the competition gathers a huge number of people willing to race for the cheese-head. Cheese head accelerates to 150 km / h, it is impossible to catch it. The weight of cheese is 5 kg, but earlier in this competition, which is more than 200 years old, people rolled round stone weighing 18 kg. It was a pretty traumatic event and organizers decided to replace it with a lighter cheese head. 



2. Kayaking trip on the Green River
Interesting contest on a kayaking is called The Green River Narrows Kayak Race, it has great popularity. Every year hundreds of professionals and amateurs are going to conquer the river. 







1. The World BASE Race in Norway
The title of the winner of the most dangerous event is rightfully belongs to The World BASE Race. In this competition people jump wearing a special wing-suit. This garment allows you to float in the air without a parachute. The main goal of the competition is to become the fastest who reaches the earth. 






