Pleasure of Reading 
Essay No. 01

Reading is regarded as one of our good hobbies. Reading of books provides us with such pleasure. Which we do not get from any other  activity. It enhances our knowledge and sharpness our intellect. Francis bacon, the English author has said reading make the a full man conference a ready man and writing an exact amen. A good reader develops a good personality. Books contain grains of wisdom. They give us sound moral advice. By reading good books, we learn to love virtue and hate sin. The reading of good books develops and elevates our character.

Reading is possible only when there is a script that is something written. Only the educated can get pleasure by reading books. There was a time when the blind did not have access to this pleasure, but now even they can read with the help of Braille. Reading of books is really a great source of pleasures.

Our sense organs convey feelings to our mind. When such feelings are agreeable to the mind, they give us pleasure. Reading books gives us the pleasure, which is the intellectual food for our mind. We required food for our body and also for our mind. Reading good books provides the necessary food for our minds.

Reading offers pleasures to men of all tastes, temperaments and age groups. There are books for children, books for young men and books for aged people. Nothing is really so exciting so absorbing and so thrilling as reading books.

Books contain the experiences and thoughts of great writers. By reading books we come in contact with their minds. Kalidas offers us all the sweetness and beauty of nature, Rabindranath Tagore tells us the real l truth of our life. Keats offers a feast for our heart, mind and all our sense.

Every age and country has its  greatriters. Literature is the mirror of society. When we read writings of great authors like Shakespeare , Tagore , Tolstoy or Perm Chad , we gorged ourselves and our families surroundings. We move with the characters, we feel think act and suffers with them. It makes us live other people live. The pleasure of reading has this uniqueness that it brings us all the thrills of actualizing without the dangers of it.

Pleasure of reading is the only pleasure through which we improved ourselves. By reading books we acquire knowledge about the world .books give us knowledge of new things, new places an new persons. By reading one can learn many things within a short period of time.

but in today’s fast paced life , reading is not possible for every person. Lack of time , expansion of IT and growing   TV culture have changed the interests and hobbies of people. But for a cultured human being, books   remain always a source of immense pleasure.

We should make a wise choice of books. Francis bacon said some books are to be tasted, other are to be swallowed and some few to be chewed and digested. Some books are harmful to the readers. Such books must be avoided. Biographies and autobiographies of great men give us a lot to learn. Reading scriptures and sacred books makes us broad minded, tolerant an patient. It is the reading of good books alone which bestows upon us the maximum benefit.

Books are our best friends. When we are alone they entertain us. Good  books gives us great enjoyment. Loneliness is no problem for a lover of books. He can spend time easily by reading is favorite books. If we are in a cheerful  mood. Our joy is increased by reading. When we are in a depressed and dejected mood, books console and soothe our trouble minds. They provide us the best advice and guidance in our difficulties. The great English poet Milton has rightly said a good book is the precious lifeblood of master spirit , embalmed  and treasured up on purpose to a life beyond life. When we read the writings of great authors, we are engrossed in their writings’.

Reading for pleasure is quite different from reading under compulsion. When we read under compulsions, definitely our joy is killed. Reading for pleasure is different from academic or professional reading.  Reading for pleasure is informal and voluntary. But academic or professional reading is compulsory and sometimes devoid of joy.

We must not allow our pleasure to be spoiled by anything. Every man should cultivate a taste for reading , because it is the least expensive and the most exciting and thrilling means of recreation. The habit of reading should be developed from childhood. It brings us unmixed pleasure, sense of peace, health and well being and keeps us well-informed and up to date. There is no end to learning and getting pleasure from books.

 

Essay No. 02

 

Pleasures of Reading

Outline: The advantages of reading — the pleasures of reading novels; they carry us into a different world and enlarge our experience; suspense and our tendency to identify ourselves with the hero — other kinds of books are also delightful.

The advantages of reading are well known. Reading enables us to pass examinations and get jobs, and enhances our general ability and competence in any field of life. But the pleasures of reading are as important as its uses. In fact, books cannot be really useful unless they are first enjoyed.

There can be few more delightful ways of spending a holiday than reading a good novel. One source of pleasure afforded by novels is that they make us escape for a time from the drab, humdrum circumstances of our lives. Romantic novels, of course, transport us into an exciting world poles apart from our own. But even realistic novels bring us into contact with experiences different from our own. Our personal experience in real life is limited and much of it is commonplace. Reading fiction is delightful, partly because it indirectly provides us with several experiences for which we have no opportunities in actual life.

Another source of the pleasure of reading novels is suspense. A novel with a good plot makes us eager to know, from beginning to end, what is to happen next. It is because of this quality of suspense in some novels that we are unwilling to lay them aside till we have read them to the end. Again, as everybody knows, another reason why reading novels is pleasant is that we tend to identify ourselves with the hero or the central character, and experience his joys and sorrows for the time being. This mainly accounts for our pleasure in reading biographies.

While fiction is usually considered to be a delightful form of reading, other kinds of writing to impart pleasure. Apart from plays which resemble fiction, books of travel and light essays are enjoyable. Poetry appeals to our -feelings and sense of beauty. Reading even serious or heavy books – books on science or philosophy – is not without its joy for those who are interested in the subjects concerned. All knowledge is pleasure, and reading a book on the dullest or the most unpleasant subjects can be pleasurable, provided one is intensely interested in it.

Difficult Words: Enhances – increases. drab – dull. suspense-uncertainty about what will happen. fiction – novels. impart – give.