The End of Communist Ideology 

The cold war is over. With the end of cold war it was felt that the Communist ideology has ended too. The credit went to Nikhail Gorbachov, ex-President of former Soviet Union. But how can an ideology end? No ideology dies. It remains in some form or the other. Its degree varies but continues to play its role. When the Communist systems were crumbling in late 80’s and early 90’s, Francis Fukyama wrote an article, ‘end of ideology’. It led to serious debates regarding end of Communist ideology.

The Communist ideology propounded by Karl Marx was realized by Lenin in Russian Revolution in former Soviet Union. Communist ideology stands for real freedom by end of all exploitations. It believes in primacy of economic factors which determines human consciousness. According to Marx, society is divided into two classes one is haves and the other is have nots. The interests of both are of hostile nature. It believes in existence of conflicts. State is an instrument of domination in the hands of economically dominant class. So during Communism, the state will wither away and result into stateless and classless society. But during the transformation, a socialist state will be established with ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’ which will help in the process of Communism.

In former Soviet Union, these tenets of Communist ideology were not really practiced. It assumed serious distortions on political, social and economic fronts. Moreover, Communist ideology started playing greater role in International relations. After the end of Second World War, the whole world was divided into two blocks: the Capitalist and Communist World. Cold war started between two blocks. Two superpowers emerged led by United States of America and former Soviet Union. Various countries joined either of the two blocks. It was ideology which played decisive role in foreign policies of nations.

During Stalin’s period, measures were not taken to achieve the goals of Communism. As a result various distortions of the ideology developed later on which became its own enemy. On political front, people did not enjoy real freedom. There was rule of only one Communist party which led to totalitarian system. On economic front, system of command economy was practiced. With initial success of centralized planning and infrastructure developed, the whole system became stagnant, inefficient and corrupt. Corruption was rampant which are the whole system gradually. People were left with shortages and long queues. Discontent and frustration developed which led to demands to change the system. Social tensions started mounting due to non-freedom and collapsed economic performances. Dictatorship of the proletariat which was for a short time prolonged and the state could not wither away due to corrupt bureaucracy and one party rule.

When Gorbachov became the President, the economy was in really bad shape. Former Soviet Union was not in a position to compete with the West, though militarily it was still powerful. Gorbachov went for drastic reforms. He initiated reforms both at international and national levels. He deideolized the international relations which helped in easing of tensions between Superpowers. Various dissonant measures were taken which ultimately helped in ending the cold war. East European countries which were part of Communist block were allowed to pursue independent foreign policies. In fact, they were first to go under transformation. Berlin wall fell and East Germany and West Germany were unified.

On the domestic front, planned economy was abandoned. Private enterprises were allowed to flourish and go for entrepreneurship. Heavy investments from West followed soon to save the Russian economy. The principles of ‘Glashost and Prestroika’ were followed which meant ‘openness’ and ‘restructuring’ respectively. Multiparty system developed in Russia. It galvanized the situation so much that some groups wanted speedy reforms. They were not satisfied with the pace of the reforms. The changes in former Soviet Union were of revolutionary nature. It happened so fast that the reforms became irreversible. It led to the disintegration of former Soviet Union. All the republics became independent very soon as if they were waiting for the freedom.

The drastic changes were the need of the hour to save the Communist ideology. There was no total disappearance of Communist Party or ideology. But its dominance has been limited. In the subsequent polls in Russia, Communist Party continues to play decisive role. In China, it is still there with reformed strategies. In China, modernization of economy has been gradual with the political control of Communist party. In many East European Countries, Communist Parties have come to power. Communist ideology is still there in many countries but with a difference. As an ideology it can’t die. It is an utopia which stands for humanism, real freedom. Its aberrations have been taken care of. It will be there to play a role as long as exploitations and sufferings continue to be there. Now it exercises its responsibilities with human face.Intellectual Property Rights-Patents

Intellectual property rights has assumed wide significance over the years. Many problems have started cropping over the patent issue. Few disputes and controversies have surrounded awkward trade related intellectual property rights. All the disputes related to trade related Intellectual Property Rights are solved at World Trade Organization (WTO). Recently India won turmeric patent case. But India failed in challenging the neem patent case.

Intellectual property rights are the rights of persons who have invented or created something unique in different fields. It protects the commercial interests on inventors. Others who want to use those inventions have to pay. This is patenting and patenting is done for certain years. Intellectual property rights cover patents, copy rights, trademarks, industrial design. Patent laws in India permit only process patents for drug, food, medicine and chemical inventions for a period of seven years. In India product patents are not permitted and all other inventions can be patented for 20 years. They have pressurized India to adopt the product patents and patents for 20 years. Similary, the WTO wants product patents for all inventions for a period of 20 years.

As a part of the WTO agreement, India was required to bring her laws and regulations into conformity with her obligations under the agreement. Naturally it was required to amend the Patent Act, 1970 in accordance with the provisions of the WTO agreement. India has transition period of 10 years from January 1, 1995 to apply the provisions of the agreement.

The Indian Patent Act of 1970 offers Patent to processes by which new medicines are produced rather than to the drugs themselves, India has agreed to bring the products as well under patent cover. In addition to this, while the duration of drug patents was earlier 10 years, the WTO agreement calls for a 20 year protection. But changes in two areas had to be made in January 1995 itself. Firstly, applications for product patents were to be made immediately and secondly, exclusively marketing rights had to be given to holders of product patents.

Changes in the old provisions over patent protection aroused opposition and criticism in the developing countries especially India. It was felt that it will raise the prices of medicines sharply in developing countries where the poor people will find it difficult to afford. But there is some truth in it. Of course, the prices of drugs under patent protection will rise but the reality is that less than 10 percent of medicines in market are covered by patent and few drugs have that protection. So there will not be all round rise in the drug prices.

Several measures have been taken to streamline and strengthen the administrative system to implement Intellectual Property Rights. To an existing stock of about 30 million patent documents published so far about a million-covering approximately 400,000 inventions is added every year. It is estimated that about 80 per cent of the world’s knowledge of viable and adequate technologies is contained in patent documents. In India, CSIR has done computerized data base on Indian patents. Also few NGOs along with SCIR have done pioneer work in documenting indigenous knowledge. The former Prime Minister Mr. I.K. Gujral had given green signal for a proposal to totally revamp the patenting system in the country. Its main aim is to remove the various deficiencies which were resulting in delays and secondly restricting will taken place addressing obsolete infrastructure, laws of scientific and administrative staff.

After signing the WTO agreement India has no option but to follow it. But still perceptions on patents differ. Earlier the patent issue over Neem was lost by India. But recently the decision has been in favour of India in turmeric patent case. CSIR argues well against the US patent on turmeric poweder. The US patent had been granted to University of Mississippi for the use of turmeric powder as wound-healing agent. It was argued by CSIR that Indians had been using turmeric powder as a wound-healing agent for centuries and so there was nothing new. They showed from various documents and old Vedic scriptures also. One positive fallout of this judgment will be that we can expect fairness on the patents issue and exploitation of our traditional knowledge base can be stopped, even if product patents are allowed. United States is going for patenting even life form. This will go against developing countries especially India because India’s plant resources are a potential laboratory for hundreds of novel inventions.

India has to amend its 1970 Patent Act to comply with the provisions of WTO agreement. National consensus should emerge and legislation should be enacted for application of patents and grant of exclusive marketing rights. Failure to do so can affect Indian exports and also compensation to the affected countries. Also a comprehensive data network is needed in order to protect our traditional knowledge base. Moreover, with proper database we are able to argue and fight well over patents issue and also piracy can be checked. Also fears of bio-piracy of India’s rich plant and micro-organism diversity has to be addressed properly by our government and NGOS.