6 MYTHS PROVED BY “MYTHBUSTERS”

A team of MythBusters
Facebook Twitter  Share
Who has not laughed when watched Mythbusters and their experiments? They’ve proved that not all of the myths are fiction and human naivety. There are myths that are really true. 

1. Roily driver spends more gas
At first sight, it seems to be a falsehood that we were taught as children by teachers and parents. To a certain time such stories seem to be quite realistic, but when we grow up we realize that this is nonsense which we believed in. 
Mythbusters compared the fuel consumption of an angry driver’s car and quiet man’s car. The legend proved true 100%. Nervous driving wastes more gasoline. 

2. Slap clears the mind
Each of us has seen in the movie how a man that is in a state of hysteria can be calmed down by the slap in the face. But most of us do not believe things that are shown in the movies; and to be honest that’s right, but not in this case. The experiments showed that a sharp slap in the face returns clarity of mind and improves mental ability. 

3. Swearing helps overcome pain
Experiments have shown that swearing really helps. We will not share all the curses that have helped Kerry during the experiment, but the pain is really tolerated much easier if you swear. The interesting thing is that when a person screams saying how much it hurts – nothing happens, and the desired effect to reduce pain is not achieved. 

4. Feet run cold with fear
Even in this myth there is rational kernel. In order to prove this myth Kerry, Grant and Tory had to meet with their most terrifying nightmares. During fright Kari and Grant’s feet temperature has declined significantly, but it did not happen with Tori, so the myth was titled as "plausible".

5. Elephants are afraid of mice
It’s hard to believe in this! It’s the same if hunters were afraid of rabbits. Even if it sounds absurdly, it’s true. Elephants do everything in order not to meet this “killing” rodent. It’s not that the animal stays in the state of hysteria, but the fact that these huge creatures pay attention to small mice is surprising. 

6. Ultrasonic motion detector may be cheated with the help of the sheets
Simply said, if you keep in front of you a sheet, you’ll be able to bypass this security device. Ordinary sheet extinguishes sound waves emitted by the ultrasonic motion detector. 

