JAIPUR: “PINK CITY” OF INDIA

Facebook Twitter  Share
No doubt the city of Jaipur can be called one of the most interesting and exciting places of India. It was founded in 1727 and was immediately proclaimed the capital of the Indian state Rajasthan. You will easily recognize Jaipur because of its unique and colorful architecture. It is known that in 1876, before Prince of Wales’ visit, a special decree was issued to paint all the local building in pink color. Since those times the city received its second name the “Pink City”. Jaipur is a very popular city, especially among tourists who love excursions to different Grand Palaces. 

Most of the Jaipur’s attractions you will see inside the city. You will enjoy the splendor and originality of the ancient Indian architecture. The main attraction of the city is City Palace Complex. It’s an architectural miracle that simultaneously combines the picturesque gardens that are similar to the classic English parks, chic lounges, and unusual buildings with marble carvings and, of course, lovely courtyards made of pink stones. Earlier these palace halls were used for welcome receptions and military parades, now they are used as museums. For example, in Sileh Khan you will see a collection of ceremonial weapon which is made of gold and decorated with diamonds. In Mubarak Mahal you will find an interesting museum of costumes, textiles and Indian musical instruments. 

Hawa Mahel or the Palace of Winds was built in 1799 and was made of rosy sandstone. The entire building was exquisitely made with interesting patterns and it resembles a huge jewel-box. For those who appreciate art, the main attraction here will be Amber Fort. This building is known for its artistic style, large ramparts, gates and cobbled paths. Entering the courtyard, you will find a great number of different souvenir shops and workshops, as well as a huge number of interesting places to suit all tastes. Jaigarh Fort is famous for its world’s largest wheeled cannon, Nahargarh Fort and watchtower. We advise you to visit the Fort late in the evening in order to enjoy the beauty of extraordinary scenery and Magan Sagar Lake. Jaipur is a flower of tourism in India. 

