THE MAGNIFICENCE OF NATURE: FINGER LAKES
WRITTEN BY BATISHCHEVA ANNA CATEGORY: TRAVEL AND RECREATION
Finger Lakes
Facebook Twitter  Share
The Finger Lakes are a pattern of magnificent lakes situated in the west-central part of New York. They are very popular among the tourists from all over the world. Most lakes are narrow and long, and due to their shape lakes have such a funny name. The two longest among them are Cayuga Lake and Seneca Lake. They are also the deepest ones in the USA. 

The Finger Lakes area is famous wine producing region. Thanks to the amazing location grapes here have particular taste and juiciness. Over 100 wineries and vineyards are located around the lakes. Thanks to the lakes the grapes are protected from frosts in spring and receive desired coolness in summer. 

After the adoption of the relevant law in 1976 tourists are allowed to visit wineries. This is also one of the reasons why there are so many tourists in the region. 

Originally the Finger Lakes region was inhabited by Indians. They believed in evil spirits who created the lakes, in fact, if you look at them from the air you will see that they resemble huge claw marks of the predator. While visiting this region, it’s recommended to visit famous Watkins Glen International. 

The Finger Lake area is full of many beautiful and magnificent old mansions and houses. It was here where mark Twain found his inspiration created well known characters Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer, and here were spent the last days of his life. 

Many famous museums are situated in this area; amongst them is Earth Museum, Museum of Glass in Corning, Rockwell Museum of Western Art, National Museum of Aeronautics, National Toy Museum and others. Women’s Rights National Historic Park is also situated near Seneca Falls. Here you can find Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s house and the Wesleyan Chapel, where she spoke about women’s rights for the first time in 1848. 

A trip to Finger lakes will leave warm and pleasant memories!
