The test of democracy is the freedom of criticism

 

The world democracy is derived from a conjunction of two Greek words “demos” meaning people and “krasi” which means rule. Thus democracy is when people choose to rule themselves or in the words of Abraham Lincoln, “government by the people , of the people , for the people”. Obviously everyone in the country  cannot possibly take part in the government so the people elect those by whom they want to be governed.

          Any opinion against the existent shame is criticism. Criticism’ can be of two types- constructive and destructive. The purpose of constructive criticism to improve the preset for the good of all. This is a positive approach. Destructive criticism is usually criticism for the sake of criticism. It is a negative approach which is disconcerting at the individual level and destructive in general.

          People represent all shades of opinion and include all pressure interest groups who want rules of governance to their liken. When opinions clash, the e3lected few come in for criticism. Similarly the elected few too do not always consider public interests before they act. This too evokes criticism. If the elected representative truly wants to serve the people and has their interests at heart he will welcome criticism which shows up defects and shortcomings. However, he must be willing to admit that he was wrong and must be willing to change. It is the rare individual who has he courage to admit he was wrong. Finding criticism offensive and unpleasant , and because they have the power to do so, the rulers stifle free criticism. If criticism is silenced democracy ceases to have meaning. The people no longer rule themselves but are ruled  by a group of men by force and democracy becomes confused with plutocracy.

          As mentioned earlier criticism is of two types, positive and negative. It is positive criticisms that is the true test of democracy. Merely allowing criticism full rein does not mean that democracy is thriving. Negative criticism is harmful for a democracy as it negates all attempts at good governance. Criticism too must be responsible and serve a definite purpose. It must aid and not hinder the process of governance.

          Constructive criticism  is a must for all democracies. It encourages public participation in the government, which is the hallmark of any democracy. Moreover , it compels the politicians to accept responsibility for their actions and gauge public response. It is a system of feedback by which the public  pulse can be felt. The for a of criticism , namely the press and other media, public gatherings and meetings, etc,. must be encouraged in any democracy. When these for a are alive and active only then can democracy thrive.
		  
		  
		  
		  Don’t ban capital punishment

 

 

Those who oppose capital punishment would rather have us believe that it is applied indiscriminately in each in each and every case related to some heinous crime. Death penalty is awarded and should b awarded as the  last resort on the part of the judicial authority to apply it only in cases where human sensitivity touches the abyss of degeneration.

          We must remember that capital punishment is the only case in which the accused is given the rare chance of appealing against his sentence before the Head of the state, even though his crime has been proved in the apex court of the land, the Supreme Court. This shows that the law makers,  the law interpreters and the law enforcement agencies have all understood the delicate nature of capital punishment – considering it a necessary evil which must be retained.

          The convention of the judge making the pen defunct with which he sings the order to give a criminal death penalty. Shows the reluctance with which he reaches at the decision. The decision convey the message that moral problems sometimes need concerts solutions and cannot always be allowed  to   linger on in the realms of spirituality.

          It is sad but true that as human civilization attains overall progress in various fields. Human values keep a beating as manifested in the increasing cases of violence, murder, child rape-not to talk  of terrorist and secessionist activates. So , how does one tackle people who are trigger happy, who do not talk but fire bullets without any qualms because they  have come round to a belief that taking someone’s life is the only way to get things done?

          With the passage of time, the “dark” psyche of human beings is being exposed. Till the time human beings turn or return as “angles”, there is hardly any point in taken a passionately idealistic view of the concept called capital punishment.

          If capital punishment is banned, there would be no fear of a possible death by hanging in the minds of the criminals, they would then easily continue with their “job” knowing that even if they  were caught and convicted , the prospect of living  some kind of “safe” life would remain. Such a smug attitude on the part of the offenders of the law, who already have found many a loophole in the system , would well second a death knell for civilized living.