HEALTHY FOOD IS A KEY TO A HEALTHY BODY


Facebook Twitter  Share
Healthy lifestyle

Modern life is full of work, study, stresses, different events, etc. We try to do too many things at once, but sometimes we just don’t have enough time for simple things such as eating healthy! It isn’t a secret that the quality of the food we eat absolutely affects the quality of our life! Of course, healthy food, a proper drinking regimen and exercises is an important source of life!

Food pyramid

There are lots of opinions about what is useful to eat and what isn’t. So, it’s difficult to respond unambiguously to this question. But one thing for sure: we and only we decide what to "feed" our body to be healthy, energetic and successful. Of course, you know about the food pyramid, which includes proteins carbohydrates, vegetable fats, vitamins, etc. But sometimes it's so hard to resist the temptations without trying plenty of different products that are available on the shelves of a supermarket. One of the most important things is to find a compromise with yourself and understand that you are responsible for your health!

Label on the products

In this article we will talk about food additives, preservatives, artificial food colorings contained in lots ofproducts that we eat daily or buy our children. Answer for yourself these three simple questions. Have you ever thought about dangerous additives? Do you read the label on the products you buy? Do you know how to identify harmful additives that you need to avoid?

Everyone knows that food additives are used as helpers to improve the taste, color, nutrition, appearance and product shelf life. We often want to eat something junk or just don’t have time to read the ingredients listed on the label if the foods. But we always have to remember that many products which look harmless can affect your health: cause allergies, serious illnesses, cause weight problems, hyperactivity in children, birth defects in newborns and even cancer. Take time and look attentively at the ingredients which are included to products you are going to buy. To make this easier for you, we have prepared a table of the most dangerous food additives, artificial dyes and preservatives which are banned in many other countries.

Food additives

Here is the list of the most "aggressive" and dangerous ingredients:

Name of the ingredient	The name on the label	Products with food additives
ARTIFICIAL FOOD COLORING	Yellow 5, Yellow 6, Red 40 ??? Red 3, Blue 1, Blue 2, Green 3, Orange B	Candies, jams, cereals, drinks, snacks, pie fillings, ice cream, bakery goods, cheese, beverages, lemonade and more.
SWEETENERS	High-fructose corn syrup, glucose, sucrose (sugar),  aspartame, sorbitol, fructose, saccharin, etc.   	Soft drinks, sugar, desserts, g?ms, baked goods, many  processed foods,  canned vegetables, flavored yogurts, candies, substitutes,  ice tea, pudding, salad dressings and more.
PRESERVATIVES	Ascorbic acid, sodium benzoate,citric acid, calcium propionate,  calcium sorbate,  sodium nitrite, sodium erythorbate, potassium sorbate,  Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) and butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), tocopherols (Vitamin E)	Fast food, meat products, chips, crackers, margarine, baked goods and more.
FLAVOR ENCHANCERS	Monosodium glutamate (MSG), autolyzed yeast extract,  hydrolyzed soy protein, inosinate  or disodium guanylate. 	Soups, meat products,  chips, salad dressings and more.
TRANS FATS	Trans fat or  Partially hydrogenated oil  	Popcorn, baked and fried  goods,  blended vegetable oil, frozen foods, biscuits, chips and more.
FAT SUBSTITUTE	Olestra (sucrose polyester), carrageenan, modified food starch,   protein-based fat substitutes, cellulose gel, xanthan gum, polydextrose, starch-based gels or cellulose	Chocolate, baked goods, chips, snacks, dressings, cakes, desserts, cheese, butter, dairy products, ice cream, mayonnaise and more.
Healthy lifestyle

As a result of all of the above, you understand that healthy eating will provide you, your family, children with good well-being and will be good for your health. Of course, it seems you can't eat anything at all because of the large number of dangerous food additives and preservatives. But not every product contains this! While buying products, you should check the ingredients carefully; try to reduce the consumption of junk food and, of course, lead a healthy lifestyle!
