10 BEST CYCLING ROUTES IN EUROPE
Facebook Twitter  Share
We present our 10 locations in Europe, which is worth visiting and cycling there. Wonderful tours will help you to see a new country, and get a lot of positive emotions. 

Loire Valley (France) is famous for wine tours and now is gaining popularity among the cycling tourists. The valley is a flat area, so even novice cyclists will feel comfortable here. 

Windermere, Lake District (UK) is the most ideal place for those people who adore lakes, scenic beauty and cool climate. Cycling in this region is represented by many routes, the longest of which is 40 km. 

Mallorca is suitable for beginners and for experienced travelers as well. Just remember that the summers here are hot, and it is not advised to arrange bicycle races of high intensity here in summer time. The best time for cycling in this region is the fall or spring. 

Isle of Wight (UK) suites best of all for those people who love the sea. Interesting route, the length of which is 110 km, passes through the fishing villages. It should be said that not every cyclists will master this route, but everyone has the opportunity to ride and enjoy the beautiful sea views. 

City of Spa (Belgium) is home to all the spas, but very interesting bike routes that are different in height difference, blind turns and beautiful countryside, are situated in this region

Rhine cycling path (Switzerland, Germany) has a total length of 1,200 km. If you want to select a particular route, then, it’s worth noting that the most challenging cycling routes can be found in Switzerland and the Upper Rhine, and simple ones are located from Bonn to Rotterdam. 

Alpe d'Huez (France) is a classic route in the foothills of the French Alps. The length of the route is 14 km, but the complexity of the route is more than usual. Not every experiences cycler will be able to go through it. 

Scuol - Aigle (Switzerland) is a bicycle route that crosses the state from east to west. The length of the route is 665 km, more than half of which runs along the dirt roads. The route is considered to be difficult, despite the fact that it lies in the valley areas and all because Switzerland is not a country with a flat landscape. 

Novi Colli (Italy) is another legendary bicycle route that runs through Cesenatico on the Italian coast. Every year prestigious competitions are held among bicycle enthusiasts in this country, which are attended by about 11 thousand people. 

Passo Stelvio (Dolomites, Italy) is the most difficult European route, with a height difference, with a 12-degree rise and a serpentine road with the length of 22 km. 