Violence against women

 

 Violence against women is not a new or recent phenomenon. Women have been the victims of violence all through the ages, in all societies, cultures, regions or religious communities in the world.

In the Vedic period, Indian women enjoyed a relatively comfortable position. Gradually, violence against them began to be practiced; the doors of educational, economic, social, political and cultural opportunities were gradually closed for them.

Today, violence against women in India has assumed an alarming proportion. According to one estimate, there are about thirty specific forms of violence being committed against women from the pre-natal stage to their death. Such forms include feticide, infanticide, deliberate check on the supply of sufficient or/ and nutritious food, medical neglect, deprivation of educational opportunities, child marriages, sexual abuse of the girl child, forced marriages, rapes prostitution, sexual harassment, pregnancies at small intervals, wife-battering, bride-burning, cursing the widows, witch-hunting, neglect of the old women, etc.

It is not just actual physical violence that is used to intimidate women. Even the threat of it is enough cause for mental agony and that too is a form of violence. The fear of being beaten, having to bear the pain, the humiliation and trauma of rape helps to keep women in a state of subjugation

The remedy for violence is not very far to seek. It is within us. What we have to do is to entirely leave the animal kingdom, be human and to give humane treatment to others. Law-enforcing machinery must be trained and made sensitive to the issue. Women must organize themselves in groups and raise a collective voice against a system that turns a blind eye towards, if not actually condones, violent acts against women. Every public minded person and the media inst contribute to spreading a civilized attitude in society.

 

Essay No. 02

 

Violence against Women

Despite all progress in art, literature, governance, and science and technology we have not been able to remove the gender discrimination. Men still dominate over the women. Huge number of cases of domestic violence and sexual abuse are testimony to that.

Violence against women is linked to the status of women worldwide. To date, at least 45 nations have specific legislation on domestic violence, 21 more are drafting new laws, and many others have amended criminal assault laws to include abuse. But, the report states, legislation and policies alone are insufficient tools to eliminate gender-based violence because it is linked to systemic gender discrimination and societal norms that devalue women. Solving the problem of violence requires solving the problem of gender inequality,

Gender inequality fuels violence against women and the power imbalances. As long as women in diverse countries do not have access to property and employment and equal wages, to the seats of power, to education, it is possible for governments to ignore them and their needs. Our work to end violence against women must be a conscious part of our work towards the empowerment of women in general.

Eliminating violence against women requires a coordinated and sustained effort on many levels; this includes national governments and international organizations, allocating the necessary resources to fund violence-prevention efforts. But ending violence against women requires more than a financial investment and the allocation of resources. The report offers ten recommendations to help create a framework to end gender-based violence around the world:

All judges, prosecutors, law enforcement officers and others involved in the criminal-justice system must be trained on violence against women and gender inequality.

These are an essential component of national plans to stop violence against women and should be aimed at women and men of all ages, states the report. The report calls for campaigns to make women aware of their rights, to teach men about the legal and personal consequences of committing violence, and to educate the public about the devastating impact violence against women has on society.

Empowerment, economic independence, and political representation are essential markers of gender equality and necessary societal factors to help eliminate gender-based violence, according to the report.Men can play a role in helping end violence against women by working with other men to teach them that abuse is wrong. Men’s involvement in violence prevention holds great promise,

The report calls for community responses to gender-based violence that Are aimed at transforming prevailing attitudes and norms, and are developed ip coordination with social service providers, law enforcement and advocacy organizations. Leaders at all levels must speak up and join women in generating a  momentum for ending violence against women. Governments, the international community and the private sector must contribute resources to efforts to end violence against women in order to develop sustainable and successful prevention efforts. Partnerships between governments, non-governmental organizations, advocacy groups, the private sector, the academic community and others are extremely important in efforts to end violence against women and develop successful violence prevention strategies, states the report.

The progress made to date will help to chart future directions, we need to expand proven strategies and develop new approaches so that women and men can turn hope into reality and truly live lives free of violence. We need to create a world where power and courage are honoured in both women and men, and where both have the opportunity to reach their full potential.