BEST LAKES FOR SUMMER HOLIDAYS



Facebook Twitter  Share
We all love to relax by the ocean, but trip is not affordable to everyone. Instead, we recommend you to think about going to the beautiful and picturesque lake. Here is the list of the best lakes for summer holidays. 

Lake Michigan
Lake Michigan is located on the border of the states of Wisconsin, Michigan, Indiana and Illinois – that’s why it is ideal for those who live in the Midwest. Lake Michigan has also another name - Third Coast of the USA. And it was named so because of the beaches which surround the lake with a total length of over 1,600 kilometers. Here you can find more than the usual water activities. There are various wine tasting, fishing boats rental on the territory of the lake. This is where you can go to a real farmer's market and where there are many interesting things to see! 

Lake Powell
Lake Powell is located between the state of Arizona and Utah, and nowadays it is one of the most beautiful lakes that you have ever seen! In fact, it is an underwater Grand Canyon, as the lake is surrounded by red cliffs and small canyons. Its length is almost 200 miles, so you can be sure that you will be able to find a very private place. Most people prefer to rent houseboats, but be sure that camping on the beach is not worse than any of those houses! 

Lake Placid
The lake is located in New York and is known by the fact that the Olympic Games were held here in 1980. Lake Placid is surrounded by the Adirondack Park. Alpine Village, which is located on 6 million acres of land, offers fun for the whole family. Here you can play golf and canoeing. Lake Placid offers everything from luxury resorts and rental of private homes to the village huts and campsites. 

Lake Chelan
Lake Chelan, as you know, is situated in the Washington area. This is the third deepest lake in the United States, and which is surrounded by mountains and beaches. Here you can taste the best wines, enjoy the meals from famous restaurants, or simply go on a cycling or hiking. 

Lake Lanier
And finally, if you live in the south-eastern part of the United States, you need to visit Lake Lanier. Here you will also find a huge variety of entertainment for the whole family. There is really everything, and the rest in this place will give you a sense of freedom and tranquility. 

