CURSED TREASURE: TRUE OR FICTION?
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: OTHERS
Cursed Treasure
Facebook Twitter  Share
Very often treasures are surrounded by many legends, and sometimes very scary legends. You can believe them or not, but facts remain to be facts. 

Hope diamond
Hope Diamond is a huge diamond weighing 45.52 carats, which is stored in the Museum of Natural History at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington. With this stone is associated many legends. All the people who possessed the stone died under very mysterious circumstances. Last winner of stone Edward McLean, publisher of The Washington Post, decided to break this chain of events and passed a stone to the museum, but nevertheless he died of a heart attack. He was only 52. 

The Hands Resist Him 
The picture of the American artist Bill Stoneham was written in 1972. The official version says that the painting depicts the artist himself. It is a very mysterious picture that describes the real world and the world of dreams. It is said that the owner of the gallery where the painting was first exhibited and the critic, who first saw it, both died within a year after the initial presentation. Then the owner of the painting became John Marley, who died in 1984. Later the painting was found in a landfill by a family, but the little girl in the room of which the picture hung, insisted that the painting came to life at night, and her parents decided to get rid of it by selling the picture. The fate of mystical painting is unknown. 

Kohinur Brilliant
For the first time this stone of 105 carats is mentioned in the 14th century, its home is the central part of India. Originally the stone was owned by Rajahs, who ruled in Malwa. Legend says that the owner of the stone will rule the world, but at the same time, will meet all the vicissitudes of life. And only god and a woman can safely wear this stone. It should be noted that all the holders of the stone were strong rulers, but at some point lost everything, including life. Now the stone is inlaid in the crown of Britain's Queen Elizabeth. 

Treasures of Tutankhamen
This tomb is surrounded by a lot of legends. It was found in 1922 by Howard Carter, the British archeologist. It is considered to be one of the most expensive tombs, the most expensive find in this tomb is considered to be the gold mask. The legend says that together with the treasure, the curse became free, which also killed the 12-member team of Carter. 

You may believe these legends or not, but facts remain to be facts! 


?. Petrova