ENJOY THE WORLD AT HOME. THE MOST INTERESTING WEBCAMS IN THE WORLD
WRITTEN BY M. PETROVA CATEGORY: TIPS OF THE DAY
Facebook Twitter  Share
Nowadays everyone wants to open something new in the world. People travel a lot. New emotions, new ideas, new experiences – all these is given by the trips around the world. 

But we do not have enough time for everything. In this article we want to offer you to travel to the most interesting palaces with the help of new technologies - webcams. 

The International Space Station
Most likely, this is the most exciting camera that can show you the entire planet, at a glance. Video stream from the camera outside of the ISS was launched by NASA, but remember that the video is transmitted to Earth only during the time when astronauts sleep. 

Niagara Falls
You have always dreamed to visit Niagara Falls and listen to the music of water and nature? Just be very careful, the sound of the waterfall is so strong that it drowns out all the sounds around you. The most beautiful and powerful waterfall in North America and of course you need to watch a video and to listen to its’ sounds. 

Tembe Webcam
A webcam in South Africa allows you to observe the life of wild animals and birds, which are located in the Kruger National Park. Here you can see elephants, rhinos, tigers and other birds and animals. 

Webcam in Times Square
Times Square is also called the crossroads of the world. The most famous central square of New York is located in Midtown Manhattan, at the intersection of Broadway and 7-Th Avenue. Times Square is the most visited and popular place in the city. And the city governors decided to install multiple webcams in the area in order to be able to observe the life of New York City from all angles. Particularly interesting to observe this camera during Christmas. 

Taturo Sushi Shop
This webcam has got into our top five because of its originality. It does not broadcast the lives of animals or crazy city life. But the Japanese decided to surprise the whole world and show everyone how sushi is prepared in a simple restaurant in Japan. It should be mentioned that this web-camera is extremely popular. Take a look at it, may be you will discover something new for you. 
